Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Video
 
Audio
 
Software
 
Images
Sign up for free
Log in
About Blog Events Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer
Full text of "Gravity's Rainbow"
See other formats
28& 


.»»GRAVITY’S RAINBOW 


“IF I WERE BANISHED TO THE MOON TO- 

MORROW and could take only five books along, 
this would have to be one of them.” 

3 —The New York Times 


“IT ISN'T PLAUSIBLE TO CALL A NOVEL 
GREAT the week it’s published, because the 
future will decide that.” 


—Newsweek 


“A FUNNY, DISTURBING, EXHAUSTING 
AND MASSIVE NOVEL, mind-fogging in its 
range and permutations, its display of knowledge 
and virtuosity ... [Pynchon is] a remarkable 
mind and talent.” 

—Time 


THe Propicious BESTSELLER... 
GRAVITY’S RAINBOW 


Rey” oh 


... THOMAS PYNCHON! 


“OF ALL THE AMERICAN NOVELISTS who 
emerged with Pynchon in the 1960's, only Von- 
negut, Barth and Heller are his peers.” 

—The New York Times Book Review - 


“INSIDE HIS HEAD IS A MOVIE SCREEN 

on which an endless series of very funny and 

ghastly one-reelers is being projected.” i. 
—Atlantic Monthly 


“MORE THAN ANY OTHER LIVING 

WRITER, including Norman Mailer, he has 

caught the inward movement of our time.” 
—Saturday Review 


wie 
we 


“A ScREAMING Comes ACROSS THE SKY...” 
THOMAS PYNCHON 
{ 


.-- GRAVITYS RAINBOW! 


_ “Il HAVE BEEN TURNING PAGES DAY AND 

_ NIGHT, watching my fingers go ink-black, bleed- 
ing from paper cuts, reading Gravity’s Rainbow. 
Forests have gone to the blade to make paper 
Be for this novel. Don’t mourn the trees; read the 
fe book.” 


—Geoffrey Wolff, San Francisco Examiner 


_ “MOBY DICK AND ULYSSES... COME TO 
MIND most often as one reads Gravity’s Rain- 
bow... Gravity's Rainbow marks an advance be- 
yond either.” 

—Saturday Review 


“A PICARESQUE, APOCALYPTIC, ABSURD- 
IST NOVEL that creates a complex mythology 
to describe our present predicament... our en- 

q tire century.” 
= —The New Yorker 


ESE A Vast ENTERTAINMENT... 
GRAVITY’S RAINBOW 


S Bantam Books by Thomas P 
_ Ask your bookseller for the boo ks yo 
es 


_ THE CRYING OF LOT 49 _ 
-GRAVITY’S RAINBOW — . 


_ Gravity's 
~ Rainbow 


a hens Pynchon 


Pac 
z 
= 
a 
9S 


) 
Zonpon ° 


b 


= 
z 
r=) 
% 


es 


For Richard Farifia 


This low-priced Bantam Book 
has been completely reset in a type a 
designed for easy re , and was 
from new = It contains tha pHs 4 
text of the original hard-cover edition. 
NOT ONE WORD HAS BEEN OMITTED, 


wt 


GRAVITY’S RAINBOW 
A Bantam oes panne arrangement with 

hd, iking ed bp Inc. 
PRINTING HISTORY 

Va faeces a ee March 1973 

+eoe+e March Mah ioe 
7a pared coves 
Bantam edition Beet 5 March 1974 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Harvard University Press: of the 
lishers and the tees FE Bo f drnhers by m worms 
x age vp Editor, The Poems Cam- 


brid , Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 

Copyright 1931, 1953, ina Pres of Harvard Univeral Press, 

college. 

Little, Brown and Company: From_“Because I Could Not 
Stop for Death” from The Complete Poems of Emily Dickin- 
son edited by Thomas H. hse = 

W. W. Norton & Percy nc. and Insel Verlag: From 
Duino Elegies and So: by Rainer Maria 


Copyri nt 4 » 1873 by Thon 
This book p Shatin cca fermi by 

"For format ‘aph or Fig hy c# 
or informat 


fe rebeiyg Presi: vege wie ng rest oon?” 
Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada 
Bantam Books are published by Bantam Books, Inc, Its trade- 
mark, consisting of the words “Bantam B. and 
Pa or Ofien Oe oe Se Noe . Repisrada te Stata 
i 
Books, Inc., 666 Fifth Avenue, New York, York 10019, 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


I 


Beyond the Zero 


ee Nature does not know extinction; all it 
Pps: knows is transformation. Everything science 
has taught me, and continues to teach me, 
strengthens my belief in the continuity of 

our spiritual existence after death. — 
—WERNHER VON BRAUN © 


‘ 


O 


A screaming comes across the sky. It has happened be- 
fore, but there is nothing to compare it to now. 

; It is too late. The Evacuation still proceeds, but it’s all 

_ theatre. There are no lights inside the cars. No light any- 
' where. Above him lift girders old as an iron queen, and — 
glass somewhere far above that would let the light of day 
through. But it’s night. He’s afraid of the way the glass 
will fall—soon—it will be a spectacle: the fall of a crystal 
palace. But coming down in total blackout, without one 

_ glint of light, only great invisible crashing. 

. Inside the carriage, which is built on several levels, he 
sits in velveteen darkness, with nothing to smoke, feeling 
metal nearer and farther rub and connect, steam escaping 

__ in puffs, a vibration in the carriage’s frame, a poising, an 

__ uneasiness, all the others pressed in around, feeble ones, 

second sheep, all out of luck and time: drunks, old. vet- 
erans still in shock from ordnance 20 years obsolete, hus- 
tlers in city clothes, derelicts, exhausted women with more 

_ children than it seems could belong to anyone, stacked 

_ about among the rest of the things to be carried out to 

_\ Salvation, Only the nearer faces are visible to all, and at 

_ that only as half-silvered images in a view finder, green- 

__ Stained VIP faces remembered behind bulletproof win- 

_ dows speeding through the city... . 

__. They have begun to move. They pass in line, out of the 

_ main station, out of downtown, and. begin .pushing into 

_ older and more desolate parts of the city. Is this the way 

_ out? Faces turn to the windows, but no one dares ask, not 
_ Out loud. Rain comes down. No, this is not a disentangle- 
_. Inent from, but a progressive knotting into—they go in 
_ under archways, secret entrances of rotted concrete that 
_ only looked like loops of an underpass... certain trestles 
__ of blackened wood have moved slowly by overhead, and 
_ the smells begun of coal from days far to the past, smells 
_ of naphtha winters, of Sundays when no traffic came 
_ through, of the coral-like and mysteriously vital growth, 
around the blind curves and out the lonely spurs, a sour 
smell of rolling-stock absence, of maturing rust, developing 


3 


4 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


through those emptying days brilliant and deep, espe- 
cially at dawn, with blue shadows to seal its passage, to try 
to bring events to Absolute Zero... and it is poorer the 
deeper they go...ruinous secret cities of poor, places 
whose names he has never heard . . . the walls break down, 
the roofs get fewer and so do the chances for light. The 
road, which ought to be opening out into a broader high- 
way, instead has been getting narrower, more broken, 
comering tighter and tighter until all at once, much too 
soon, they are under the final arch: brakes grab and spring 
terribly. It is a judgment from which there is no appeal. 

The caravan has halted, It is the end of the line. All the 
evacuees are ordered out. They move slowly, but without 
resistance. Those marshaling them wear cockades the color 
of lead, and do not speak. It is some vast, very old and 
dark hotel, an iron extension of the track and switchery by 
which they have come here. ... Globular lights, painted a 
dark green, hang from under the fancy iron eaves, unlit for 
centuries ... the crowd moves without murmurs or cough- 
ing down corridors straight and functional as warehouse 
aisles ... velvet black surfaces contain the movement: the 
smell is of old wood, of remote wings empty all this time 
just reopened to accommodate the rush of souls, of cold 
plaster where all the rats have died, only their ghosts, still 
as cave-painting, fixed stubborn and luminous in the 
walls... the evacuees are taken in lots, by elevator—a 
moving wood scaffold open on all sides, hoisted by old 
tarry ropes and cast-iron pulleys whose spokes are shaped 
like Ss. At each brown floor, passengers move on and 
off ... thousands of these hushed rooms without light. ... 

Some wait alone, some share their invisible rooms with 
others. Invisible, yes, what do the furnishings matter, at 
this stage of things? Underfoot crunches the oldest of city 
dirt, last crystallizations of all the city had denied, threat- 
ened, lied to its children. Each has been hearing a voice, 
one he thought was talking only to him, say, “You didn’t 
really believe you’d be saved. Come, we all know who we 
are by now. No one was ever going to take the trouble to 
save you, old fellow... .” ' | 

There is no way out. Lie and wait, lie still and be quiet. 
Screaming holds across the sky. When it comes, will it 
come in darkness, or will it bring its own light? Will the 
light come before or after? 


Beyond the Zero 5 


But it is already light. How long has it been light? All 
_ this while, light has come percolating in, along with the 
cold morning air flowing now across his nipples: it has be- 
gun to reveal an assortment of drunken wastrels, some in 
uniform and some not, clutching empty or near-empty 
bottles, here draped over a chair, there huddled into a cold 
fireplace, or sprawled on various divans, un-Hoovered 
_ rugs and chaise longues down the different levels of the 
- enormous room, snoring and wheezing at many rhythms, 
in self-renewing chorus, as London light, winter and elastic 
light, grows between the faces of the mullioned windows, 
grows among the strata of last night’s smoke still hung, 
fading, from the waxed beams of the ceiling. All these 
~ horizontal here, these comrades in arms, look just as rosy 
~ as a bunch of Dutch peasants dreaming of their certain 
_ resurrection in the next few minutes. 
; His name is Capt. Geoffrey (“Pirate”) Prentice. He is 
_ wrapped in a thick blanket, a tartan of orange, rust, and 
scarlet. His skull feels made of metal. 
_. Just above him, twelve feet overhead, Teddy: Bloat is 
about to fall out of the minstrels’ gallery, having chosen to 
collapse just at the spot where somebody in a grandiose 
___ fit, weeks before, had kicked out two of the ebony balus- 
ters, Now, in his stupor, Bloat has been inching through 
the opening, head, arms, and torso, until all that’s keeping 


a 
_ him up there is an empty champagne split in his hip 
pocket, that’s got hooked somehow— 

S By now Pirate has managed to sit up on his narrow 
a bachelor bed, and blink about. How awful. How bloody 


-  awful...above him, he hears cloth rip. The Special 
_ Operations Executive has trained him to fast responses. He 
3 _ leaps off of the cot and kicks it rolling on its casters in 
_ Bloat’s direction. Bloat, plummeting, hits square amidships 
_ with a great strum of bedsprings. One of the legs collapses. 
_ “Good morning,” notes Pirate. Bloat smiles briefly and 
goes back to sleep, snuggling well into Pirate’s blanket. 
_ Bloat is one of the co-tenants of the place, a maisonette 
erected last century, not far from the Chelsea Embankment, 
Corydon Throsp, an acquaintance of the Ressettis’ who 
_ wore hair smocks and liked to cultivate pharmaceutical 
plants up on the roof (a tradition young Osbie Feel has 
lately revived), a few of them hardy enough to survive 
fogs and frosts, but most returning, as fragments of 


6 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


peculiar alkaloids, to rooftop earth, along with manure 
from a trio of prize Wessex Saddleback sows quartered 
there by Throsp’s successor, and dead leaves off many 
decorative trees transplanted to the roof by later tenants, 
and the odd unstomachable meal thrown or vomited there 
by this or that sensitive epicurean—all got scumbled to- 
gether, eventually, by the knives of the seasons, to an 
impasto, feet thick, of unbelievable black topsoil in which 
anything could grow, not the least being bananas. Pirate, 
driven to despair by the wartime banana shortage, de- 
cided to build a glass hothouse on the roof, and persuade 
a friend who flew the Rio-to—Ascension—to—Fort-Lamy run 
to pinch him a sapling banana tree or two, in exchange for 
a German camera, should Pirate happen across one on his 
next mission by parachute. 

Pirate has become famous for his -Banana Breakfasts. 
Messmates throng here from all over England, even some 
who are allergic or outright hostile to bananas, just to 
watch—for the politics of bacteria, the soil’s stringing of 
rings and chains in nets only God can tell the meshes of, 
have seen the fruit thrive often to lengths of a foot and a 
half, yes amazing but true. 

Pirate in the lavatory stands pissing, without a thought 
in his head. Then he threads himself into a wool robe he 
wears inside out so as to keep his cigarette pocket hidden, 
not that this works to well, and circling the warm bodies 
of friends makes his way to French windows, slides out- 
side into the cold, groans as it hits the fillings in his teeth, 
climbs a spiral ladder ringing to the roof garden and stands 
for a bit, watching the river. The sun is still below the 
horizon. The day feels like rain, but for now the air is 
uncommonly clear. The great power station, and the gas- 
works beyond, stand precisely: crystals grown in morning’s 
beaker, stacks, vents, towers, plumbing, gnarled emissions 
of steam and smoke.... 

“Hhabh,” Pirate in a voiceless roar watching his breath 
slip away over the parapets, “hhaahhh!” Rooftops dance 
in the morning. His giant bananas cluster, radiant yellow, 
humid green. His companions below dream drooling of a 
Banana Breakfast. This well-scrubbed day ought to be no 
worse than any— 


Will it? Far to the east, down in the pink sky, something 


Beyond the Zero | 7 


has just sparked, very brightly. A new star, nothing less 
noticeable. He leans on the parapet to watch. The bril- 
bs liant point has already become a short vertical white line. 
It must be somewhere out over the North Sea... at least 
Is _that far... icefields below and a cold smear of sun.... 

What is it? Nothing like this ever happens. But Pirate 
. knows it, after all. He has seen it in a film, just in the last 
_ fortnight... it’s a vapor trail. Already a finger’s width 
higher now. But not from an airplane. Airplanes are not 
launched vertically, This is the new, and still Most Secret, 
_~ German rocket bomb. 

“Incoming mail.” Did he whisper that, or only think it? 
He tightens the ragged belt of his robe. Well, the range of 
these things is supposed to be over 200 miles. You can’t 
see a vapor trail 200 miles, now, can you. 

_ Oh, Oh, yes: around the curve of the Earth, farther 
east, the sun over there, just risen over in Holland, is strik- 
tt the rocket’s exhaust, drops and crystals, making them 


aoe 


blaze clear across the sea.... 

r The white line, abruptly, has stopped its climb. That 
__would be fuel cutoff, end of burning, what’s their word... 
__ _Brennschluss. We don’t have one. Or else it’s classified. 
_. The bottom of the line, the original star, has already be- 
_ gun to vanish in red daybreak. But the racket will be here 
___ before Pirate sees the sun rise. 

‘The trail, smudged, slightly torn in two or three direc 

_ tions, hangs in the sky. Already the rocket, gone pure 
ballistic, has risen higher. But invisible now. 

__. Oughtn’t he to be doing something... get on to the 
operations room at Stanmore, they must have it on the 
Channel radars—no: no time, really. Less than five 
' minutes Hague to here (the time it takes to walk down to 
_ the teashop on the comer... for light from the sun to 
___ reach the planet of love .. . no time at all). Run out in the 
street? Warn the others? ; 

_.._. Pick bananas. He trudges through black compost in to 
_ the hothouse. He feels he’s about to shit. The missile, sixty 
__ miles high, must be coming up on the peak of its trajectory 
_ by now... beginning its fall...now.... 

__ Trusswork is pierced by daylight, milky panes beam 
_ beneficently down. How could there be a winter—even 
_ this one—gray enough to age this iron that can sing in the 


8 Gravity’s RAInsow 


wind, or cloud these windows that open into another sea- 
son, however falsely preserved? 

Pirate looks at his watch. Nothing registers. The pores 
of his face are prickling. Emptying his mind—a Com- 
mando trick—he steps into the wet heat of his bananery, 
sets about picking the ripest and the best, holding up the 
skirt of his robe to drop them in. Allowing himself to count 
only bananas, moving barelegged among the pendulous 
bunches, among these yellow chandeliers, this tropical 
twilight. ... 


Out into the winter again. The contrail is gone entirely 


from the sky. Pirate’s sweat lies on his skin almost as cold 
as ice. 

He takes some time lighting a cigarette. He won’t hear 
the thing come in. It travels faster than the speed of 
sound. The first news you get of it is the blast. Then, if 
youre still around, you hear the sound of it coming in. 

What if it should hit exactly—ahh, no—for a split 
second you'd have to feel the very point, with the terrible 
mass above, strike the top of the skull... . 

Pirate hunches his shoulders, bearing his bananas down 
the corkscrew ladder. 


O \ pean 


Across a blue tile patio, in through a door to the kitchen. 
Routine: plug in American blending machine won from 
Yank last summer, some poker game, table stakes, B.O.Q. 
somewhere in the north, never remember now. ... Chop 
several bananas into pieces. Make coffee in urn. Get can of 
milk from cooler. Puree ‘nanas in milk. Lovely. I would 
coat all the booze-corroded stomachs of Fave that . Bit of 
marge, still smells all right, melt in skillet. Peel more 
bananas, slice lengthwise. Marge sizzling, in go long slices. 
Light oven whoomp blow us all up someday oh, ha, ha, 
yes. Peeled whole bananas to go on broiler grill soon as it 
heats. Find marshmallows. . 

In staggers Teddy Bloat with Pirate’s blanket over his 
head, slips on a banana peel and falls on his ass, “Kill my- 
self,” he mumbles, 

“The Germans will do it for you. Guess what I saw from 
the roof.” 


: 3 i f Beyond the Zero 9 
“That V-2 on the way?” 


, yes. : 

“TI watched it out the window. About ten minutes ago. 
Looked queer, didn’t it. Haven’t heard a thing since, have 
you. It must have fallen short. Out to sea or something.” 

“Ten minutes?” Trying to read the time on his watch. 
. “At least.” Bloat is sitting on the floor, working the 
banana peel into a pajama lapel for a boutonniere. 

Pirate goes to the phone and rings up Stanmore after 
all. Has to go through the usual long, long routine, but 
knows he’s already stopped believing in the rocket he saw. 
God has plucked it for him, out of its airless sky, like a 
steel banana. “Prentice here, did you have anything like a 
pip from Holland a moment ago. Aha. Aha. Yes, we saw 
it.” This could ruin a man’s taste for sunrises. He rings off. 
_ “They lost it over the coast. They’re calling it premature 
__-<Brennschluss.” 

_ “Cheer up,” Teddy crawling back toward the busted 
~' cot, “There'll be more.” 

Good old Bloat, always the positive word. Pirate for a 
_ few seconds there, waiting to talk to Stanmore, was think- 
ing, Danger’s over, Banana Breakfast is saved. But it’s 
_. only a reprieve. Isn’t it. There will indeed be others, each 
__~ just as likely to land on top of him. No one either side of 
a _the front knows exactly how many more. Will we have to 
__ stop watching the sky? 

y Osbie Feel stands in the minstrels’ gallery, holding one 
of the biggest of Pirate’s bananas so that it protrudes out 
the fly of his striped pajama bottoms—stroking with his 
other hand the great jaundiced curve in triplets against 
_ 4/4 toward the ceiling, he acknowledges dawn with the 


following: 


Time to gather your arse up off the floor, 
‘(have a bana-na) 

Brush your teeth and go toddling off to war. 

Wave your hand to sleepy land, 

Kiss those dreams away, 

Tell Miss Grable you're not able, 

Not till V-E Day, oh, 

Ey'rything'll be grand in Civvie Street 
(have a bana-na) 

Bubbly wine and girls wiv lips so sweet— 

But there’s still the German or two to fight, 


10 Graviry’s RAInBow 


So show us a smile that’s shiny bright, 
And then, as we may have suggested once before— 
Gather yer blooming arse up off the floor! 


There’s a second verse, but before he can get quite into 
it, prancing Osbie is leaped upon and thoroughly pum- 
meled, in part with his own stout banana, by Bartley 
Gobbitch, DeCoverley Pox, and Maurice (“Saxophone”) 
Reed, among others. In the kitchen, black-market marsh- 
mallows slide languid into syrup atop Pirate’s double 
boiler, and soon begin thickly to bubble. Coffee brews. 
On a wooden pub sign daringly taken, one daylight raid, 
by a drunken Bartley Gobbitch, across which still survives 
in intaglio the legend snirE AND sHAFT, Teddy Bloat is 
mincing bananas with a great isosceles knife, from beneath 
whose nervous blade Pirate with one hand shovels the 
blonde mash into waffle batter resilient with fresh hens’ 
eggs, for which Osbie Feel has exchanged an equal num- 
ber of golf balls, these being even rarer this winter than 
real eggs, other hand blending the fruit in, not overvig- 
orously, with a wire whisk, whilst surly Osbie himself, 
sucking frequently at a half-pint milk bottle filled with 
Vat 69 and water, tends to the bananas in the skillet and 
broiler. Near the exit to the blue patio, DeCoverley Pox 
and Joaquin Stick stand by a concrete scale model. of the' 
Jungfrau, which some enthusiast back during the twenties 
spent a painstaking year modeling and casting before find- 
ing out it was too large to get out of any door, socking the 
slopes of the famous mountain with red rubber hot-water 
bags full of ice cubes, the idea being to pulverize the ice 
for Pirate’s banana frappés. With their nights’ growths of 
beard, matted hair, bloodshot eyes, miasmata of foul 
breath, DeCoverley and Joaquin are wasted gods urging 
on a tardy glacier. 

Elsewhere in the maisonette, other drinking companions: 
disentangle from blankets (one spilling wind from his, 
dreaming of a parachute), piss into bathroom sinks, look at 
themselves with dismay in concave shaving mirrors, slap 
water with no clear plan in mind onto heads of thinning 
hair, struggle into Sam Brownes, dub shoes against rain 
later in the day with hand muscles already weary of it, — 
sing snatches of popular songs whose tunes they dont 


Beyond the Zero 11 


always know, lie, believing themselves warmed, in what 
_ patches of the new sunlight come between the mullions, 
_ begin tentatively to talk shop as a way of easing into 
whatever it is they'll have to be doing in less than an hour, 
lather necks and faces, yawn, pick their noses, search 
cabinets or bookcases for the hair of the dog that not with- 
. out provocation and much prior conditioning bit them last 
night. 

Now there grows among all the rooms, replacing the 
night’s old smoke, alcohol and sweat, the fragile, musa- 
ceous odor of Breakfast: flowery, permeating, surprising, 
more than the color of winter sunlight, taking over not so 

_ much through any brute pungency or volume as by the 
high intricacy to the weaving of its molecules, sharing the 
conjuror’s secret by which—though it is not often Death is 
told so clearly to fuck off—the living genetic chains prove 
even labyrinthine enough to preserve some human face 
down ten or twenty generations... so the same assertion- 
through-structure allows this war morning’s banana fra- 
grance to meander, repossess, prevail. Is there any reason 
not to open every window, and let the kind scent blanket 
all Chelsea? As a spell, against falling objects... . 

__ With a clattering of chairs, upended shell cases, 
benches, and ottomans, Pirate’s mob gather at the shores 
of the great refectory table, a southern island well across 

_ a tropic or two from chill Corydon Throsp’s mediaeval 
fantasies, crowded now over the swirling dark grain of its 
walnut uplands with banana omelets, banana sandwiches, 

__ banana casseroles, mashed bananas molded in the shape of 

__a British lion rampant, blended with eggs into batter for 
_ French toast, squeezed out a pastry nozzle across the 
_ quivering creamy reaches of a banana blancmange to spell 

_ out the words C’est magnifique, mais ce n'est pas la guerre 

_ (attributed to a French observer during the Charge of the 

__ Light Brigade) which Pirate has appropriated as_ his 

_ motto... tall cruets of pale banana syrup to pour oozing 
- over banana waffles, a giant glazed crock where diced 
__ bananas have been fermenting since the summer with wild 
honey and muscat raisins, up out of which, this winter 
‘morning, one now dips foam mugsfull of banana mead... 
_ banana croissants and banana kreplach, and banana oat- 
_ meal and banana jam and banana bread, and bananas 


12 Gravity’s RaInsow 


flamed in ancient brandy Pirate brought back last year 
from a cellar in the Pyrenees also containing a clandestine 
radio transmitter... 

The phone call, when it comes, rips easily across the 
room, the hangovers, the grabassing, the clatter of dishes, 
the shoptalk, the bitter chuckles, like a rade metal double- 
fart, and Pirate knows it’s got to be for him. Bloat, who’s 
nearest, takes it, forkful of bananes glacées poised fashion- 
ably in the air. Pirate takes up a last dipper of mead, feels 
it-go valving down his throat as if it’s time, time in its 
summer tranquility, he swallows. 

“Your employer.” 

“Tt’s not fair,” Pirate moans, “I haven’t even done me 
morning pushups yet.” 

The voice, which he’s heard only once before—last year 
at a briefing, hands and face blackened, anonymous 
among.a dozen other listeners—tells Pirate now there’s a 
message addressed to him, waiting at Greenwich. 

“Tt came over in a rather delightful way,” the voice 
high-pitched and sullen, “none of my friends are that 
clever. All my mail arrives by post. Do come collect it, 
won't you, Prentice.” Receiver hits cradle a violent whack, 
connection breaks, and now Pirate knows where this morm- 
ing’s rocket landed, and why there was no explosion. In- 
coming mail, indeed. He gazes through sunlight’s but- 
tresses, back down the refectory at the others, wallowing 
in their plenitude of bananas, thick palatals of their 
hunger lost somewhere in the stretch of morning between 
them and himself. A hundred miles of it, so suddenly. 
Solitude, even among the meshes of this war, can when it 
wishes so take him by the blind gut and touch, as now, 
possessively. Pirate’s again some other side of a window, 
watching strangers eat breakfast. 

He’s driven out, away, east over Vauxhall Bridge in a 
dented green Lagonda by his batman, a Corporal Wayne. 
The morning seems to grow colder the higher the sun 
rises. Clouds begin to gather after all. A crew of American 
sappers spills into the road, on route to clear some ruin 
nearby, singing: | 


It’s eee r { 
Colder than the nipple on a witch’s tit! 


Beyond the Zero 13 


Colder than a bucket of penguin shit! 
Colder than the hairs of a polar bear’s ass! 
Colder than the frost on a champagne glass! 


No, they are making believe to. be narodnik, but I know, 
they are of Iasi, of Codreanu, his men, men of the League, 
they ... they kill for him—they have oath! They try to kill 
me... Transylvanian Magyars, they know spells... at 
night they whisper.... Well, hrrump, heh, heh, here 
comes Pirate’s Condition creeping over him again, when 
he’s least expecting it as usual—might as well mention 
here that much of what the dossiers call Pirate Prentice is 
_ a strange talent for—well, for getting inside the fantasies 
of others: being able, actually, to take over the burden of 
managing them, in this case those of an exiled Rumanian 
royalist who may prove needed in the very near future. It 
is a gift the Firm has found uncommonly useful: at this 
_ time mentally healthy leaders and other historical figures 
a are indispensable. What better way to cup and bleed 
__ them of excess anxiety than to get someone to take over 
| ae running of their exhausting little daydreams for them 
. . to live in the tame green lights of their tropical refuges, 
A in the breezes through their cabafias, to drink their tall 
Re grinls, changing your seat to face the entrances of their 
public places, not letting their innocence suffer any more 
than it already has... to get their erections for them, at 
3 the oncome of thoughts the doctors. feel are gi Piatt 
... fear all, all that they cannot afford to fear... remem- 
ering the word of P. M. S. Blackett, “You can oe run a war 
on gusts of emotion.” Just hum the nitwit little tune they 
taught you, and try not to fuck up: 


- Yes—I’m—the— 
_ Fellow that’s hav-ing other peop-le’s fan-tasies, 
Suffering what they ought to be themselves— 
No matter if Girly’s on my knee— 
If Kruppingham-Jones is late to tea, 
I don’t even get to ask for whom the bell’s . 
[Now over a lotta tubas and close-harmony trombones! 
- It never does seem to mat-ter if there’s daaaanger, 
For Danger’s a roof I fell from long ago— 


14 Gravity's Rainsow 


Tl be out-one-day and never come back, 
Forget the bitter you owe me, Jack, 
Just piss on m’ grave and car-ry on the show! 


He will then actually skip to and fro, with his knees 
high and twirling a walking stick with W. C. Fields’ head, 
nose, top hat, and all, for its knob, and surely capable of 
magic, while the band plays a second chorus. Accompany- 
ing will be a phantasmagoria, a real one, rushing toward 
the screen, in over the heads of the audiences, on little 
tracks of an elegant Victorian cross section resembling the 
profile of a chess knight conceived fancifully but not vul- 
garly so—then rushing back out again, in and out, the 
images often changing scale so quickly, so unpredictably 
that you’re apt now and then to get a bit of lime-green in 
with your rose, as they say. The scenes are highlights from 
Pirate’s career as a fantasist-surrogate, and go back to 
when he was carrying, everywhere he went, the mark of 
Youthful Folly growing in an unmistakable Mongoloid 
point, right out of the middle of his head. He had known 
for a while that certain episodes he dreamed could not be 
his own. This wasn’t through any rigorous daytime analysis 
of content, but just because he knew. But then came the 
day when he met, for the first time, the real owner of a 
dream he, Pirate, had had: it was by a drinking fountain 
in a park, a very long, neat row of benches, a feeling of 
sea just over a landscaped rim of small cypresses, gray 
crushed stone on the walks looking soft to sleep on as the 
brim of a fedora, and here comes this buttonless and 
drooling derelict, the one you are afraid of ever meeting, 
to pause and watch two Girl Guides trying to adjust the 
water pressure of the fountain. They bent over, unaware, 
the saucy darlings, of the fatal strips of white cotton 
knickers thus displayed, the undercurves of baby-fat little 
buttocks a blow to the Genital Brain, however pixilated, 
The tramp laughed and pointed, he looked back at Pirate 
then and said something extraordinary; “Eh? Girl Guides 
start pumping water... your sound will be the sizzling 
night... eh?” staring directly at no one but Pirate now, no 
more pretense.... Well, Pirate had dreamed these very 
words, morning before ‘last, just before waking, they'd 
been part of the usual list of prizes in a Competition grown 

sf y 


a Beyond the Zero 15 


- erowded and perilous, out of some indoor intervention of 
_ charcoal streets...he couldn’t remember that well... 
scared out of his wits by now, he replied, “Go away, or I 
will call a policeman.” 
a It took care of the immediate problem for him. But 
~ gooner or later the time would come when someone else 
- would find out his gift, someone to whom it mattered—he 
A had a long-running fantasy of his own, rather a Eugéne 
; Sue melodrama, in which he would be abducted by an 
organization of dacoits or Sicilians, and used for unspeak- 
able purposes. 

In 1935 he had his first episode outside any condition 
of known sleep—it was during his Kipling Period, beastly 
Fuzzy-Wuzzies far as eye could see, dracunculiasis and 
_ Oriental sore rampant among the troops, no beer for a 
month, wireless being jammed by other Powers who would 
be masters of these horrid blacks, God knows why, and all 
_ folklore broken down, no Cary Grant larking in and out 
slipping elephant medicine in the punchbowls out here... 

- not even an Arab With A Big Greasy Nose to perform on, 
' as in that wistful classic every tommy’s heard... small 
wonder that one fly-blown four in the afternoon, open- 
eyed, in the smell of rotting melon rinds, to the seventy- 

_ seven-millionth repetition of the outpost’s only Gramo- 
phone record, Sandy MacPherson playing on his organ 

_ “The Changing of the Guard,” what should develop for 
_ Pirate here but a sumptuous Oriental episode: vaulting 
lazily and well over the fence and sneaking in to town, to 
___ the Forbidden Quarter. There to stumble into an orgy held 
\ by a Messiah no one has quite recognized yet, and to 
 Inow, as your eyes meet, that you are his John the Baptist, 
his Nathan of Gaza, that it is you who must convince him 
_ of his Godhead, proclaim him to others, love him both 
_ profanely and in the Name of what'he is... it could be 
no one’s fantasy but H. A. Loaf’s. There is at least one 
_ Loaf in every outfit, it is Loaf who keeps forgetting that 
‘those of the Moslem faith are not keen on having snaps 
taken of them in the street... it is Loaf who borrows 
one’s shirt runs out of cigarettes finds the illicit one in your 
pocket and lights up in the canteen at high noon, where 
esently he is reeling about with a loose smile, addressing 
€ sergeant commanding the red-cap section by his 


16 Gravity's RAInsow - 


Christian name. So of course when Pirate makes the mis- 
take of verifying the fantasy with Loaf, it’s not very long 
at all before higher echelons know about it too. Into the 
dossier it goes, and eventually the Firm, in Their tireless 
search for negotiable skills, will summon him under White- 
hall, to observe him in his trances across the blue baize 
fields and the terrible paper gaming, his eyes rolled back 
into his head reading old, glyptic old graffiti on his own 
sockets. ... 

The first few times nothing clicked. The fantasies were 
O.K. but belonged to nobody important. But the Firm is 
patient, committed to the Long Run as They are, At last, 
one proper Sherlock Holmes London evening, the un- 
mistakable smell of gas came to Pirate from a dark street 
lamp, and out of the fog ahead materialized a giant, organ- 
like form. Carefully, black-shod step by step, Pirate ap- 
proached the thing. It began to slide forward to meet 
him, over the cobblestones slow as a snail, leaving behind 
some slime brightness of street-wake that could not have 
been from fog. In the space between them was a crossover 
point, which Pirate, being a bit faster, reached first. He 
reeled back, in horror, back past the point—but such 
recognitions are not reversible, It was a giant Adenoid. At 
least as big as St. Paul’s, and growing hour by hour. Lon- 
don, perhaps all England, was in mortal peril! 

This lymphatic monster had once blocked the dis- 
tinguished pharynx of Lord Blatherard Osmo, who at the 
time occupied the Novi Pazar desk at the Foreign Office, 
an obscure penance for the previous century of British 
policy on the Eastern Question, for on this obscure say 
had once hinged the entire fate of Bongos 


Nobody knows-where, it inisin thea 

Who'd ever think-it, could start-aupbeneienet 

Each Montenegran, and Serbian too, | 
Waitin’ for some-thing, right outa the blue—oh honey 
Pack up my Glad-stone, ’n’ brush off my suit, 

And then light me up my bigfat, cigar— 

If ya want my address, it’s 

That O-ri-ent Express, f’ 

To the san-jak of No-vi Pa-zarl 
Chorus line of quite nubile young women| naughtily at- — 
tired in Busbies and jackboots dance around for a bit here — 


Beyond the Zero 17 


while in another quarter Lord Blatherard Osmo proceeds 
to get assimilated by his own growing Adenoid, some hor- 
rible transformation of cell plasma it is quite beyond 
Edwardian medicine to explain . . . before long, tophats are 
littering the squares of Mayfair, cheap perfume hanging 
ownerless in the pub lights of the East End as the Adenoid 
_ continues on its rampage, not swallowing up its victims at 
- random, no, the fiendish Adenoid has a master plan, it’s 
_ choosing only certain personalities useful to it—there is a 
new election, a new preterition abroad in England here 
that throws the Home Office into hysterical and painful 
episodes of indecision...no one knows what to do...a 
halfhearted attempt is made to evacuate London, black » 
’ phaetons clatter in massive ant-cortege over the trusswork 
__ bridges, observer balloons are stationed in the sky, “Got it 
in Hampstead Heath, just sitting breathing, like... going 
in, and out...” “Any sort of sound down there?” “Yes, it’s 
horrible . . . like a stupendous nose sucking in snot... wait, 
now it’s... beginning to...oh, no...oh, God, I can't 
describe it, it’s so beast—” the wire is snapped, the trans- 
mission ends, the balloon rises into the teal-blue daybreak. 
Teams come down from the Cavendish Laboratory, to 
_ string the Heath with huge magnets, electric-arc terminals, 
black iron control panels full of gauges and cranks, the 
Army shows up in full battle gear with bombs full of the 
_ latest deadly gas—the Adenoid is blasted, electric-shocked, 
poisoned, changes color and shape here and there, yellow 
fat-nodes appear high over the trees... before the flash- 
_ powder cameras of the Press, a hideous green pseudopod 
\ crawls toward the cordon of troops and suddenly sshhlop! 
_ Wipes out an entire observation post with a deluge of 
Some disgusting orange mucus in which the unfortunate 
men are digested—not screaming but actually laughing, 
4 enjoying themselves. ... 
__ Pirate/Osmo’s mission is to establish liaison with the 
Adenoid. The situation is now stable, the Adenoid oc- 
_ cupies all of St. James’s, the historic buildings are no more, 
_ Government offices have been relocated, but so dispersed 
that communication among them is highly uncertain— 
_ postmen are being snatched off of their rounds by stiff- 
pimpled Adenoid tentacles of fluorescent beige, telegraph 
_ wires are apt to go down at any whim of the Adenoid. 
_ Each morning Lord Blatherard Osmo must put on his 


18 Gravity’s Rainsow 


bowler, and take his briefcase out to the Adenoid to make 
his daily démarche. It is taking up so much of his time he’s 
begun to neglect Novi Pazar, and F.O, is worried. In the 
thirties balance-of-power thinking was still quite strong, 
the diplomats were all down with Balkanosis, spies with 
foreign hybrid names lurked in all the stations of the 
Ottoman rump, code messages in a dozen Slavic tongues 
were being tattooed on bare upper lips over which the 
operatives then grew mustaches, to be shaved off only by 
authorized crypto officers and skin then grafted over the 
messages by the Firms’ plastic surgeons... their lips were 
palimpsests of secret flesh, scarred and unnaturally white, 
by which they all knew each other, 

Novi Pazar, anyhow, was still a croix mystique on the 
palm of Europe, and F.O. finally decided to go to the 
Firm for help. The Firm knew just the man. 

Every day for 24% years, Pirate went out to visit the St. 
James Adenoid. It nearly drove him crazy. Though he was 
able to develop a pidgin by which he and the Adenoid 
could communicate, unfortunately he wasn’t nasally 
equipped to make the sounds too well, and it got to be 
an awful chore. As the two of them snuffled back and 
forth, alienists in black seven-button suits, admirers of 
Dr, Freud the Adenoid clearly had no use for, stood on 
stepladders up against its loathsome grayish flank shovel- 
ing the new wonderdrug cocaine—bringing hods full of 
the white substance, in relays, up the ladders to smear on 
the throbbing glandcreature, and into the germ toxins 
bubbling nastily inside its crypts, with no visible effects at 
all (though who knows how that Adenoid felt, eh?). 

But Lord Blatherard Osmo was able at last to devote all of 


his time to Novi Pazar. Early in 1939, he was discovered 


mysteriously suffocated in a bathtub full of tapioca pud- 
ding, at the home of a Certain Viscountess. Some have 
seen in this the hand of the Firm. Months passed, World 
War II started, years passed, nothing was heard from 
Novi Pazar. Pirate Prentice had saved Europe from the 


Balkan Armageddon the old men dreamed of, giddy in 


their beds with its grandeur—though not from World War 
II, of course. But by then, the Firm was allowing Pirate 


only tiny homeopathic doses of peace, just enough to keep. : 


his defenses up, but not enough for it to ies him. 


Beyond the Zero 19 3 


O 


Teddy Bloat’s on his lunch hour, but lunch today’ll be, ack, 
a soggy banana sandwich in wax paper, which he’s pack- 
ing inside his stylish kangaroohide musette bag and 
‘threaded around the odd necessities—midget spy-camera, 
jar of mustache wax, tin of licorice, menthol and capsicum 
Meloids for a Mellow Voice, gold-rim prescription sun- 
glasses General MacArthur style, twin silver hairbrushes 
each in the shape of the flaming SHAEF sword, which 
Mother had Garrard’s make up for him and which he con- 
 siders exquisite. 
His objective this dripping winter noon is a gray stone 
- town house, neither large nor historic enough to figure in 
any guidebook, set back just out of sight of Grosvenor 
_ Square, somewhat off the official war-routes and corridors 
about the capital. When the typewriters happen to pause 
_ (8:20 and other mythical hours), and there are no flights of 
_ American bombers in the sky, and the motor traffic’s not 
too heavy in Oxford Street, you can hear winter birds 
_ cheeping outside, busy at the feeders the girls have put up. 
_Flagstones are slippery with mist. It is the dark, hard, 
_ tobacco-starved, headachy, sour-stomach middle of the 
_ day, a million bureaucrats are diligently plotting death and 
some of them even know it, many about now are already 
_ into the second or third pint of highball glass, which pro- 
_ duces a certain desperate aura here. But Bloat, going in 
_ the sandbagged entrance (provisional pyramids erected to 
_ gratify curious gods’ offspring indeed), can’t feel a bit of 
it: he’s too busy running through plausible excuses should 
he happen to get caught, not that he will, you know. ... 
_ Girl at the main desk, gumpopping, good-natured be- 
spectacled ATS, waves him on upstairs. Damp woolen 
‘ aides on the way to staff meetings, W.C.s, an hour or two 
of earnest drinking, nod, not ‘really seeing him, he’s a 
well-known face, what’s’isname’s mate, Oxford chums 
aren't they, that lieutenant works down the hall at 
ACHTUNG. ... ! 
___ The old house has been subdivided by the slummakers 
of war. ACHTUNG is Allied Clearing House, Technical 


Bes 


20 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


Units, Northern Germany. It’s a stale-smoke paper warren, 
at the moment nearly deserted, its black typewriters tall 
as grave markers. The floor is filthy lino, there are no 
windows: the electric light is yellow, cheap, merciless. 
Bloat looks into the office assigned to his old Jesus College 
friend, Lt. Oliver (“Tantivy”) Mucker-Maffick. No one’s 
about. Tantivy and the Yank are both at lunch. Good. Out 
wiv the old camera then, on with the gooseneck lamp, now 
aim the reflector just so... 

\ There must be cubicles like this all over the ETO: only 
the three dingy scuffed-cream fiberboard walls and no 
ceiling of its own. Tantivy shares it with an American 
colleague, Lt. Tyrone Slothrop. Their desks are at right 
angles, so there’s no eye contact but by squeaking around 
some go°. Tantivy’s desk is neat, Slothrop’s is a godawful 
mess. It hasn’t been cleaned down to the original wood 
surface since 1942. Things have fallen roughly into layers, 
over a base of bureaucratic smegma that sifts steadily to 
the bottom, made up of millions of tiny red and brown 
curls of rubber eraser, pencil shavings, dried tea or coffee 


stains, traces of sugar and Household Milk, much cigarette ~ 


ash, very fine black debris picked and flung from type- 
writer ribbons, decomposing library paste, broken aspirins 
ground to powder. Then comes a scatter of paperclips, 
Zippo flints, rubber bands, staples; cigarette butts and 
crumpled packs, stray matches, pins, nubs of pens, stubs of 
pencils of all colors including the hard-to-get heliotrope 
and raw umber, wooden coffee spoons, Thayer's Slippery 
Elm Throat Lozenges sent by Slothrop’s mother, Nalline, 
all the way from Massachusetts, bits of tape, string, chalk 
... above that a layer of forgotten memoranda, empty buff 
ration books, phone numbers, unanswered letters, tattered 
sheets of carbon paper, the scribbled ukulele chords to a 


dozen songs including “Johnny Doughboy Found a Rose | 


in Ireland” (“He does have some rather snappy arrange- 
ments,” Tantivy reports, “he’s a sort of American George 
Formby, if you can imagine such a thing,” but Bloat’s de- 
cided he’d rather not), an empty Kreml hair tonic bottle, 


lost pieces to different jigsaw puzzles showing parts of the 


amber left eye of a Weimaraner, the green velvet folds of 
a gown, slate-blue veining in a. distant cloud, the orange 


nimbus of an explosion (perhaps a sunpeHp rivets in the. 


j 


Beyond the Zero’ an 


skin of a Flying Fortress, the pink inner thigh of a pout- 
ing pin-up girl...a few old Weekly. Intelligence Sum- 
maries from G-2, a busted corkscrewing ukulele string, 
boxes of gummed paper stars in many colors, pieces of a 
flashlight, top to a Nugget shoe polish can in which Slo- 
throp now and then studies his blurry brass reflection, any 
number of reference books out of the ACHTUNG library 
back down the hall—a dictionary of technical German, 
an F.O, Special Handbook or Town Plan—and usually, 
unless it’s been pinched or thrown away, a News of the 
World somewhere too—Slothrop’s a faithful reader. 

_ Tacked to the wall next to Slothrop’s desk is a map of 
London, which Bloat is now busy photographing with his 
tiny camera, The musette bag is open, and the cubicle 
begins to fill with the smell of ripe bananas. Should he 

light a fag to cover this? air doesn’t exactly stir in here, 

_ they'll know someone’s been in. It takes him four ex- 

oii click zippety click, my how very efficient at this 

’s become—anyone nips in one simply drops camera 
into bag where banana-sandwich cushions fall, telltale 
sound and harmful G-loads alike. 

__ Too bad whoever’s funding this little caper won’t spring 

_ for color film. Bloat wonders if it mightn’t make a differ- 

- ence, though he knows of no one he can ask. The stars 

: heen up on Slothrop’s map cover the available spectrum, 

fs ning with silver (labeled “Darlene”) sharing a con- 

_ Stellation with Gladys, green, and Katharine, gold, and as 
the eye strays Alice, Delores, Shirley, a couple of Sallys— 
mostly red and blue through here—a cluster near Tower 

\ Hill, a violet density about Covent Garden, a nebular 

_ Streaming on into Mayfair, Soho, and out to Wembley and 


ee to Hampstead Heath—in every direction goes this 


, multicolored, here and there peeling firmament, 
» Marias, Annes, Susans, Elizabeths. 

__ But perhaps the colors are only random, uncoded, Per- 
the girls are not even real, From Tantivy, over weeks 
_ of casual questions (we know he’s your schoolmate but it’s 
too risky bringing him in), Bloat’s only able to report that 
slothrop began work on this map last autumn, about the 
ime he started going out to look at rocket-bomb disasters 
or ACHTUNG—having evidently the time, in his travels 
“among places of death, to devote to girl-chasing, If there’s 


22 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


a reason for putting up the paper stars every few days the 
man hasn’t explained it—it doesn’t seem to be for pub- 
licity, Tantivy’s the only one who even glances at the map 
and that’s more in the spirit of an amiable anthropologist— 
“Some sort of harmless Yank hobby,” he tells his friend 
Bloat. “Perhaps it’s to keep track of them all. He does lead 
rather a complicated social life,” thereupon going into the 
story of Lorraine and Judy, Charles the homosexual con- 
stable and the piano in the pantechnicon, or the bizarre 
masquerade involving Gloria and her nubile mother, a 
quid wager on the Blackpool—Preston North End game, a 
naughty version of “Silent Night,” and a providential fog. 
But none of these yarns, for the purposes of those Bloat 
reports to, are really very illuminating. ... 

Well. He’s done now. Bag zipped, lamp off and moved 
back in place. Perhaps there’s time to catch Tantivy over 
at the Snipe and Shaft, time for a comradely pint. He 
moves back down the beaverboard maze, in the weak 
yellow light, against a tide of incoming girls in galoshes, 
aloof Bloat unsmiling, no time for slap-and-tickle here you 
see, he still has his day’s delivery to make. ... 


O 


Wind has shifted around to the southwest, and the barom- 
eter’s falling. The early afternoon is already dark as eve- 
ning, under the massing rainclouds. Tyrone Slothrop is 
gonna be caught out in it, too. Today it’s been a long, idiot 
chase out to zero longitude, with the usual nothing to 
show. This one was supposed to be another premature 
airburst, the lumps of burning rocket showering down for 
miles around, most of it into the river, only one piece in 
any kind of shape and that well surrounded, by the time 
Slothrop arrived, with the tightest security he’s seen yet, 
and the least friendly. Soft, faded berets against the slate 
clouds, Mark III Stens set on automatic, mustaches mouth- 
wide covering enormous upper lips, humorless—no chance 
for any American lieutenant to get a look, not today. ~ 
ACHTUNG, anyhow, is the poor relative of Allied in- 
telligence. At least this time Slothrop’s not alone, he’s had 
the cold comfort of seeing his opposite number from T.L., 


. ; Beyond the Zero 23 


and shortly after that even the man’s section chief, come 
_ fussing onto the scene in a ’37 Wolseley Wasp, both 
turned back too. Ha! Neither of them returning Slothrop’s 
- amiable nod. Tough shit, fellas, But shrewd Tyrone hangs 
around, distributing Lucky Strikes, long enough to find at 
least what’s up with this Unlucky Strike, here. 
What it is is a graphite cylinder, about six inches long 
\ and two in diameter, all but a few flakes of its Army-green 
- paint charred away. Only piece that survived the burst. 
Evidently it was meant to. There seem to be papers 
stashed inside. Sergeant-major burned his hand picking it 
up and was heard to holler Oh fuck, causing laughter 
' among the lower paygrades. Everybody was waiting 
around for a Captain Prentice from S.0.E. (those prickly 
bastards take their time about everything), who does 
_ presently show up. Slothrop gets a glimpse—windburned 
__ face, big mean mother. Prentice takes the cylinder, drives 
away, and that’s that. 
In which case, Slothrop reckons, ACHTUNG can, a bit 
_ wearily, submit its fifty-millionth interbranch request to 
. that S.0.E., asking for some report on the cylinder’s con- 
tents, and, as usual, be ignored. It’s O.K., he’s not bitter, 
_ §.0.E. ignores everybody, and everybody ignores ACH- 
_' TUNG. A-and what does it matter, anyhow? It’s his last 
_ rocket for a while, Hopefully for good. 
This morning in his iv basket were orders sending him 
a TDY some hospital out in the East End. No explanation 
_ beyond an attached carbon copy of a note to ACHTUNG 
__ Tequesting his reassignment “as part of the P.W.E. Testing 
_ Programme.” Testing? P.W.E. is Political Warfare Execu- 
_ tive, he looked that up. Some more of that Minnesota 
-Multiphasic shit, no doubt. But it will be a change from 
__ this rocket-hunting foutine, which is*beginning to get a 
little old. 
__. Once upon a time Slothrop cared. No kidding. He thinks 
he did, anyway. A lot of stuff prior to 1944 is getting 
_ blurry now. He can remember the first Blitz only as a 
_ tong spell of good luck. Nothing that Luftwaffe dropped 
came near him. But this last summer they started in with 
those buzzbombs. You’d be walking on the street, in bed 
_ just dozing off suddenly here comes this farting sound 
_ over the rooftops—if it just keeps on, rising to a peak 
i) 


a 


24 Gravity's Ramnsow 


and passing over why that’s fine, then it’s somebody else’s 
worry... but if the engine cuts off, look out Jackson—it’s 
begun its dive, sloshing the fuel aft, away, from the en- 
gine burner, and you’ve got 10 seconds to get under some- 
thing. Well, it wasn’t really too bad. After a while you 
adjusted—found yourself making small bets, a shilling or 
two, with Tantivy Mucker-Maffick at the next desk, about 
where the next doodle would hit. ... 

But then last September the rockets came, Them fucking 
rockets. You couldn’t adjust to the bastards. No way. For 
the first time, he was surprised to find that he was really 
scared. Began drinking heavier, sleeping less, chain-smok- 
ing, feeling in some way he’d been taken for a sucker. 
Christ, it wasn’t supposed to keep on like this... . 

“TI say Slothrop, you’ve already got one in your mouth—” 

“Nervous,” Slothrop lighting up anyway. 

“Well not mine,” Tantivy pleads... 

“Two at a time, see?” making them point down like 
comicbook fangs. The lieutenants stare at each other 
through the beery shadows, with the day deepening out- 
side the high cold windows of the Snipe and Shaft, and 
Tantivy about to laugh or snort oh God across the wood 
Atlantic of their table. 

Atlantics aplenty there’ve been these three years, often 
rougher than the one William, the first transatlantic Slo- 
throp, crossed many ancestors ago. Barbarities of dress and 
speech, lapses in behavior—one horrible evening drunken 
Slothrop, Tantivy’s guest at the Junior Athenaeum, got 
them both 86’d feinting with the beak of a stuffed owl after 
the jugular of DeCoverley Pox whilst Pox, at bay on a 
billiard table, attempted to ram a cue ball down Slo- 
throp’s throat. This sort of thing goes on dismayingly often: 
yet kindness is a sturdy enough ship for these oceans, 
Tantivy always there blushing or smiling and Slothrop 
surprised at how, when it’s really counted, Tantivy hasn't 
ever let him down. 

He knows he can spill what’s on his mind. It hasnt 
much to do with today’s amorous report on Norma (dimply 
Cedar Rapids subdeb legs), Marjorie (tall, elegant, a build 
out of the chorus line at the Windmill) and the strange 
events Saturday night at the Frick Frack Club in Soho, a 

-haunt of low reputation with moving spotlights of many 


Beyond the Zero 25 


pastel hues, oFF Limits and NO JITTERBUG DANCING signs 
laid on to satisfy the many sorts of police, military and 
civilian, whatever “civilian” means nowadays, who look in 
from time to time, and where against all chance, through 
some horrible secret plot, Slothrop, who was to meet one, 
walks in sees who but both, lined up in a row, the angle 
deliberately just for him, over the blue wool shoulder of 
an engineman 3rd class, under the bare lovely armpit of a 
lindy-hopping girl swung and posed, skin stained lavender 
by the shifting light just there, and then, paranoia flooding 
up, the two faces beginning to turn his way.... 
Both young ladies happen to be silver stars on Slothrop’s 
map. He must’ve been feeling silvery both times—shiny, 
_ jingling. The stars he pastes up are colored only to go with 
how he feels that day, blue on up to golden. Never to rank 
_a single one—how can he? Nobody sees the map but 
_ Tantivy, and Christ they're all beautiful...in leaf or 
flower around his wintering city, in teashops, in the queues 
babushkaed and coatwrapped, sighing, sneezing, all lisle 
legs on the curbstones, hitchhiking, typing or filing with 
-pompadours sprouting yellow pencils, he finds them— 
dames, tomatoes, sweater girls—yes it is a little obsessive 
maybe but ... “I know there is wilde love and joy enough 
in the world,” preached Thomas Hooker, “as there are 
wilde Thyme, and other herbes; but we would have 
garden love, and garden joy, of Gods owne planting.” How 
Slothrop’s garden grows. Teems with virgin’s-bower, with 
forget-me-nots, with rue—and all over the place, purple 
and yellow as hickeys; a prevalence of love-in-idleness. 
He likes to tell them about fireflies, English girls don’t 
know about fireflies, which is about all Slothrop knows for 
sure about English girls. 
‘The map does puzzle Tantivy. It cannot be put down 
to the usual loud-mouthed American ass-banditry, except 
as a fraternity-boy reflex in a vacuum, a reflex Slothrop 
can’t help, barking on into an empty lab, into a worm- 
_holing of echoing hallways, long after the need has van- 
_ ished and the brothers gone to WW II and their chances 
for death. Slothrop really doesn’t like to talk about his 
girls: Tantivy has to steer him diplomatically, even now. 
_ At first Slothrop, quaintly gentlemanly, didn’t talk at all, 
till he found out how shy Tantivy was. It dawned on him 


26 Gravity’s RAInBOow 


then that Tantivy was looking to be fixed up. At about the 
same time, Tantivy began to see the extent of Slothrop’s 
isolation. He seemed to have no one else in London, beyond 
a multitude of girls he seldom saw again, to talk to about 
anything. 

Still Slothrop keeps his map up daily, boobishly con- 
scientious. At its best, it does celebrate a flow, a passing 
from which—among the sudden demolitions from the sky, 
mysterious orders arriving out of the dark laborings of 
nights that for himself are only idle—he can save a moment 
here or there, the days again growing colder, frost in the 
morning, the feeling of Jennifer’s breasts inside cold sweat- 
er’s wool held to warm a bit in a coal-smoke hallway he'll 
never know the daytime despondency of... cup of Bovril 
a fraction down from boiling searing his bare knee as 
Irene, naked as he is in a block of glass sunlight, holds up 
precious nylons one by one to find a pair that hasn’t lad- 
dered, each struck flashing by the light through the winter 
trellis outside... nasal: hep American-girl voices singing 
out of the grooves of some disc up through the thorn 
needle of Allison’s mother’s radiogram... snuggling for 
warmth, blackout curtains over all the windows, no light 
but the coal of their last cigarette, an English firefly, 
bobbing at her whim in cursive writing that trails a bit 
behind, words he can’t read.... . 

“What happeried?” Silence from Slothrop. “Your two 
Wrens... when they saw you...” then he notices that 
Slothrop, instead of going on with his story, has given 
himself up to shivering. Has been shivering, in fact, for 
some time. It’s cold in here, but not that cold. “Slo- 
throp—” 

“I don’t know. Jesus.” It’s interesting, though. It’s the 
weirdest feeling. He can’t stop. He turns his Ike jacket 
collar up, tucks hands inside sleeves, and sits that way for 
a while, 

Presently, after a pause, cigarette in motion, “You can’t 
hear them when they come in.” 

Tantivy knows which “they.” His eyes shift away. There 
is silence for a bit. 

“Of course you can’t, they go faster than sound.” 

“Yes but—that’s not it,” words are bursting out between 
the pulses of shivering—‘“the other kind, those V-1s, you 
can hear them. RightP Maybe you have a chance to get 


{ 


Beyond the Zero 27 


out of the way. But these things explode first, a-and then 
you hear them coming in. Except that, if you’re dead, you 
don’t hear them.” 
“Same in the infantry. You know that. You never hear 
the one that gets you.” 
“Uh, but—” 
“Think of it as a very large bullet, Slothrop. With fins.” 
“Jesus,” teeth chattering, “you’re such a comfort.” 
Tantivy, leaning anxiously through the smell of hops 
and the brown gloom, more worried now about Slothrop’s 
shaking than any specter of his own, has nothing but 
established channels he happens to know of to try and 
conjure it away. “Why not see if we can get you out to 
, where some of them have hit. . 
“What for? Come: on, Tuntivy; they’re completely 
destroyed. Aren’t they?” 
“J don’t know. I doubt even the Germans know. But it’s 
the best chance we'll have to one-up that lot over in T.I. 
Isn't it.” 
Which is how Slothrop got into investigating V-bomb 
“incidents.” Aftermaths. Each morning—at first—someone 
in Civil Defence routed ACHTUNG a list of yesterday’s 
| hits. It would come round to Slothrop last, he’d detach its 
pencil-smeared: buck slip, go draw the same aging Humber 
from the motor pool, and make his rounds, a Saint George 
after the fact, going out to poke about for droppings of the 
Beast, fragments of German hardware that wouldn’t exist, 
writing empty summaries into his notebooks—work-ther- 
apy. As inputs to ACHTUNG got faster, often he’d show 
_ up in time to help the search crews—following restless- 
- muscled RAF dogs into the plaster smell, the gas leaking, 
the leaning long splinters and sagging mesh, the prone and 
noseless caryatids, rust already at nails and naked thread- 
_ surfaces, the powdery wipe of Nothing’s hand across wall- 
_ paper awhisper with peacocks spreading their fans down 
eueeD lawns to Georgian houses long ago, to safe groves of 
holm oak... among the calls for silence following to where 
some exposed hand or brightness of skin waited them, 
‘survivor or casualty. When he couldn’t help he stayed 
clear, praying, at first, conventionally to God, first time 
‘since the other Blitz, for life to win out. But too many 
were dying, and presently, seeing no point, he stopped. 
Yesterday happened to be a good day. They found a 


28 Gravity's RaInsow 


child, alive, a little girl, half-suffocated under a Morrison 
shelter. Waiting for the stretcher, Slothrop held her small 
hand, gone purple with the cold. Dogs barked in the 
street. When she opened her eyes and saw him her first 
words were, “Any gum, chum?” Trapped there for two 
days, gumless—all he had for her was a Thayer’s Slippery 
Elm. He felt like an idiot. Before they took her off she 
brought his hand over to kiss anyway, her mouth and 
.cheek in the flare lamps cold as frost, the city around 
them at once a big desolate icebox, stale-smelling and no 
surprises inside ever again, At which point she smiled, very 
faintly, and he knew that’s what he’d been waiting for, 
wow, a Shirley Temple smile, as if this exactly canceled 
all they’d found her down in the middle of. What a damn 
fool thing. He hangs at the bottom of his blood’s ava- 
lanche, 300 years of western swamp-Yankees, and can’t 
manage but some nervous truce with their Providence. A 
détente. Ruins he goes daily to look in are each a sermon 
on vanity. That he finds, as weeks wear on, no least 
fragment of any rocket, preaches how indivisible is the 
act of death... Slothrop’s Progress: London the secular 
city instructs him: turn any corner and he can find himself 
inside a parable. 

He has become obsessed with the idea of a rocket with 
his name written on it—if they’re really set on getting him 
(“They” embracing possibilities far far beyond Nazi Ger- 
many) that’s the surest way, doesn’t cost them a thing to 
paint his name on every one, right? 

“Yes, well, that can be useful,” Tantivy watching him 
funny, “can’t it, especially in combat to, you know, pretend 
something like that. Jolly useful, Call it epeer ions! para- 
noia’ or something. But—” 

“Who’s pretending?” lighting a cigarette, Shiling his 
forelock through the smoke, “jeepers, Tantivy, listen, I 
don’t want to upset you but...I mean I’m four years 
overdue’s what it is, it could happen any time, the next 
second, right, be suddenly ... shit... just zero, just 
nothing... and. 

It’s nothing he can see or lay hands reap ote ew gases, 
a violence upon the air and no trace afterward ... a Word, 
spoken with no warning into your ear, and then silence 
forever. Beyond its invisibility, beyond hammerfall and 


Beyond the Zero 29 


doomcrack, here is its real horror, mocking, promising him 
death with German and precise confidence, laughing down 
_all of Tantivy’s quiet decencies ...no, no bullet with fins, 
Ace’...not the Word, the one Word ‘that rips apart the 
dayi en 
-- It was Friday evening, last September, just off work, 
_ heading for the Bond Street Underground station, his 
mind on the- weekend ahead and his two Wrens, that 
Norma and that Marjorie, whom he must each keep from 
learning about the other, just as he was reaching to pick 
his nose, suddenly in the sky, miles behind his back and 
up the river memento-mori a-sharp crack and’ a heavy 
explosion, rolling right behind, almost like a clap of 
thunder.” But not quite. Seconds later, this time from in 
front of him, it happened again: loud and clear, all over. 
the city. Bracketed. Not a buzzbomb, not that Luftwaffe. 
“Not thunder either,” he puzzled, out loud. 

“Some bloody gas main,” a lady with a lunchbox, puffy- 
eyed from the day, elbowing him ‘in the back as she 
passed. 

“No it’s the Germans,” her friend with rolled blonde 
fringes under a checked kerchief doing some monster 
routine here, raising her hands at Slothrop, “coming to get 
him, they especially love fat, plump Americans—” in a 
minute shell be reaching out to pinch his cheek and 
wobble it back and forth. 

“Hi, glamorpuss,” Slothrop said. Her name was Cynthia. 
He managed to get a telephone number before she was 

- waving ta-ta, borne again into the rush-hour crowds. 
_ It was one of those great iron afternoons in London: the 
yellow sun being teased apart by a thousand chimneys 
_ breathing, fawning upward without shame. This smoke is 
more than the day’s breath, more than dark strength—it is 
an imperial presence that lives and moves. People were 
crossing the streets and squares, going everywhere. Busses 
were grinding off, hundreds of them, down the long con- 
crete viaducts smeared with years’ pitiless use and no 
pleasure, into haze-gray, grease-black, red lead and pale 
aluminum, between scrap heaps that. towered high as 
“blocks of flats, down side-shoving curves into roads 
clogged with Army convoys, other tall busses and canvas 
lorries, bicycles and cars, everyone here with different 


~ 


30 Gravity’s Rainsow 


destinations and beginnings, all flowing, hitching now and 
then, over it all the enormous gas ruin of the sun among 
the smokestacks, the barrage balloons, power lines and 
chimneys brown as aging indoor wood, brown growing 
deeper, approaching black through an instant—perhaps 
the true turn of the sunset—that is wine to you, wine and 
comfort. 

The Moment was 6:43:16 British Double Summer Times 
the sky, beaten like Death’s drum, still humming, and 
Slothrop’s cock—say what? yes lookit inside his GI under- 
shorts here’s a sneaky hardon stirring, ready to jump— 
well great God where'd that come from? - 

There is in his history, and likely, God help him, in his 
dossier, a peculiar sensitivity to what is revealed in the 
sky. (But a hardon?) 

On the old schist of a tombstone in the Congregational 
churchyard back home in Mingeborough, Massachusetts, 
the hand of God emerges from a cloud, the edges of the 
figure here and there eroded by 200 years of seasons’ fire 
and ice chisels at work, and the inscription reading: 


In Memory of Conftant 
Slothrop, who died March 


y 4" 1766, iny 29% 
year of his age. 


Death is a debt to nature due, 
Which I have paid, and fo muft you. 


Constant saw, and not only with his heart, that stone 
hand pointing out of the secular clouds, pointing directly 
at him, its edges traced in unbearable light, above the 
whispering of his river and slopes of his long blue Berk- 
shires, as would his son Variable Slothrop, indeed all of 
the Slothrop blood one way or another, the nine or ten 
generations tumbling back, branching inward: every one, 
except for William the very first, lying under fallen leaves, 

mint and purple loosestrife, chilly elm and willow shadows 
over the swamp-edge graveyard in a long gradient of rot, 
leaching, assimilation with the earth, the stones showing 
round-faced angels with the long noses of dogs, toothy and. 
deep-socketed death’s heads, Masonic lems, flowery 
urns, feathery willows upright and broken, exhausted hour- 


rat 


Beyond the Zero 31 


glasses, sunfaces about to rise or set with eyes peeking 
Kilroy-style over their horizon, and memorial verse running 
from straight-on and foursquare, as for Constant Slothrop, 
through bouncy Star Spangled Banner meter for Mrs. 
Elizabeth, wife of Lt. Isaiah Slothrop (d. 1812): 


Adieu my dear friends, I have come to this grave 

Where Insatiate Death in his reaping hath brought me. 
Till Christ rise again all His children to save, 

I must lie, as His Word in the Scriptures hath taught me. 
Mark, Reader, my cry! Bend thy thoughts on the Sky, 
And in midst of prosperity, know thou may’st die. 

While the great Loom of God works in darkness above, 
And our trials here below are but threads of His Love. 


To the current Slothrop’s grandfather Frederick (d. 1933), 
who in typical sarcasm and guile bagged his epitaph from 
Emily Dickinson, without a credit line: 


Because I could not stop for Death 
He kindly stopped for me 


Each one in turn paying his debt to nature due and leav- 
ing the excess to the next link in the name’s chain. They 
began as fur traders, cordwainers, salters and smokers of 
bacon, went on into glassmaking, became selectmen, build- 
ers of tanneries, quarriers of marble. Country for miles 
around gone to necropolis, gray with marble dust; dust 
that was the breaths, the ghosts, of all those fake-Athenian 
monuments going up elsewhere across the Republic. Al- 
ways elsewhere. The money seeping its way out through 
stock portfolios more intricate than any genealogy: what 
stayed at home in Berkshire went into timberland whose 
diminishing green reaches were converted acres at a clip 
_ into paper—toilet paper, banknote stock, -newsprint—a 
_ medium or ground for shit, money, and the Word. They 
were not aristocrats, no Slothrop ever made it into the 
Social Register or the Somerset Club—they carried on 
their enterprise in silence, assimilated in life to the dy- 
_ namic that surrounded them thoroughly as in death they 
- would be to churchyard earth. Shit, money, and the Word, 
_ the three American truths, powering the American mobil- 
_ ity, claimed the Slothrops, clasped them for good to the 
country’s fate. 
; 


E 


rat 


32 : Gravity's RAInBow 


But they did not prosper... about all they did was 
persist—though it all began to go sour for them around 
the time Emily Dickinson, never far way, was writing 


Ruin is formal, devil’s work, 
Consecutive and slow— 

Fail in an instant no man did, 
Slipping is crash’s law, 


still they would keep on. The tradition, for others, was 
clear, everyone knew—mine it out, work it, take all you 
can till it’s gone then move on west, there’s plenty more. 
But out of some reasoned inertia the ’Slothrops stayed east 
in Berkshire, perverse—close to the flooded quarries and 
logged-off hillsides they’d left like signed confessions across 
all that thatchy-brown, moldering witch-country. The 
profits slackening, the family ever multiplying. Interest 
from various numbered trusts was still turned, by family 
banks down in Boston every second or third generation, 
back into. yet another trust, in long rallentando, in infinite 
series just perceptibly, term by term, dying... but never 
quite to the zero. 

The Depression, ‘by the time it came, ratified what’d 
been under way. Slothrop grew up in a hilltop desolation 
of businesses going under, hedges around the estates of 
the vastly rich, half-mythical cottagers from New York 
lapsing back now to green wilderness or straw death, all 
the crystal windows every single one smashed, Harrimans 
and Whitneys gone, lawns growing to hay, and the 
autumns no longer a time for foxtrots in the distances, 
limousines and lamps, but only the accustomed crickets 
again, apples again, early frosts to send the hummingbirds 
away, east wind, October rain: only winter certainties. 

In 1931, the year of the Great Aspinwall Hotel Fire, 
young Tyrone was visiting his aunt and uncle in Lenox. 
It was in April, but for a second or two as he was coming 
awake in the strange room and the racket of big and little 
cousins’ feet down the stairs, he thought of winter, be- 
cause so often he’d been wakened like this, at this hour of 
sleep, by Pop, or Hogan, bundled outside still blinking 
through an overlay of dream into uit ‘cold to watch the 


- Northern Lights. 


_ Beyond the Zero 33 


They scared the shit out of him. Were the radiant cur- 
tains just about to swing open? What would the ghosts 
of the North, in their finery, have to show him? 

But this was a spring night, and the sky was gusting red, 
warm-orange, the sirens howling in the valleys from 
Pittsfield, Lenox, and Lee—neighbors stood out on their 
porches to stare up at the shower of sparks falling down 
on the mountainside... “Like a meteor shower,” they 
said, “Like cinders from the Fourth of July...” it was 
1931, and those were the comparisons. The embers fell on 
and on for five hours while kids dozed and grownups got 
to drink coffee and tell fire stories from other years. 

But what Lights were these? What ghosts in command? 

_ And suppose, in the next moment, all of it, the complete 
night, were to go out of control and curtains part to show 
us a winter no one has guessed at. ... 

_ 6:43:16 BDST—in the sky right now here is the same 
unfolding, just about to break through, his face deepening 
with its light, everything about’to rush away and he to 
lose himself, just as his countryside has ever proclaimed ... 
slender church steeples poised: up and down all these 
autumn hillsides, white rockets about to fire, only seconds 
of countdown away, rose windows taking in Sunday light, 
elevating and washing the faces above the pulpits defining 
‘grace, swearing this is how it does happen—yes the great 
bright hand reaching out of the cloud.... 


O 


On the wall, in an ornate fixture of darkening bronze, a 
gas jet burns, laminar and gently singing—adjusted to 
what scientists of the last century called a “sensitive 
_ flame”: invisible at the base, as it issues from its orifice, 
_ fading upward into smooth blue light that hovers several 
inches above, a glimmering small cone that can respond to 
_ the most delicate changes in the room’s air pressure. It 
_ registers visitors as they enter and leave, each curious and 
_ civil as if the round table held some game of ‘chance. The 
circle of sitters is not at all distracted or hindered. None of 
_ your white hands or luminous trumpets here. 
5 _ Camerons officers. in parade trews, blue puttees, dress 


34 Gravity's RaiInsow 


kilts drift in conversing with enlisted Americans. . . there 
are clergymen, Home Guard or Fire Service just off duty, 
folds of wool clothing heavy with smoke smell, everyone 
grudging an hour’s sleep and looking it... ancient Ed- 
wardian ladies in crepe de Chine, West Indians softly 
plaiting vowels round less flexible. chains of Russian-Jewish 
consonants. . .. Most skate tangent to the holy circle, some 
stay, some are e of again to other rooms, all without break- 
ing in on the slender medium who sits nearest the sensitive 
flame with his back to the wall, reddish-brown curls tight- 
ening close as a skullcap, high forehead unwrinkled, dark 
lips moving now effortless, now in pain: 

“Once transected into the realm of Dominus Blicero. 
Roland found that all the signs had turned against him. . 
Lights he had studied so well as one of you, position ‘and 
movement, now gathered there at the opposite end, all in 
dance... irrelevant dance. None of Blicero’s traditional 
progress, no something new... alien.... Roland too be- 
came conscious of the wind, as his mortality had never 
allowed him. Discovered it so. ...so joyful, thatthe arrow 
must veer into it. The wind» had been blowing all year 
long, year after year, but Roland had felt only the secular 
wind ... he means, only his te wind. Yet. See 
the mind: the wind’s everywhere. . 

Here the medium’ breaks off, ist silent awhile . 
groan...a quiet, desperate moment. “Selena. a 
Have you gone, then?” 

“No, my dear,” her cheeks mottled with previous tears, 
“Tm listening.” 

“It’s control, All these things arise from one difficulty: 
control. For the first time it was inside, do you’see. The 
control is put inside. No more need to suffer passively 
under ‘outside forces’-—to veer into any wind. As if . 

“A market needed no longer be run by the Tnvistle 
Hand, but now could create itself—its own logic, momen- 
tum, ‘style, from inside. Putting the control inside was 
‘ ratifying what de facto had happened—that you had dis- 
pensed with God. But you had taken on a greater, and 
more harmful, illusion. The illusion of ¢ontrol. That A 
could do B. But that was false, Completely. No one can 
do. Things only happen, A and B are ria are as 
for parts ‘that ought ‘to be inseparable. .:. 


Seu 


ANE as 
“Sat 


Beyond the Zero 35 


“More Ouspenskian nonsense,” whispers a lady brushing 

i by on the arm of a dock worker. Odors of Diesel fuel and 
_ Sous’ le Vent mingle as they pass, Jessica Swanlake, a 
young rosy girl in the uniform of an ATS private, noticing 
the prewar perfume, looks up, hmm, the frock she 

_ imagines is about 15 guineas and who knows how many 
coupons, probably from Harrods and would do more for me, 
_ She’s also sure. The lady, suddenly looking back over her 
_ shoulder, smiles oh, yes? My gosh, did she hear? Around 
/ this place almost certainly. 

Jessica’s been standing near the séance table with a 

_ handful of darts idly plucked from the board on the wall, 
__ her head bent, pale nape and top vertebra visible above 
_ the brown wool collar and through some of her lighter 
_ brown hair, fallen either side along her cheeks. Brass 

_ throats and breasts warm to her blood, quake in the hollow 
of her hand. She seems herself, gentling their feathered 
vi Ps brushing with fingertips, to have slid into a shallow 

ance. ... 
'_ . Outside, rolling from the east, comes the muffled rip of 
__ another rocket bomb. The windows rattle, the floor shakes, 
es The sensitive flame dives for shelter, shadows across the 
_ table sent adance, darkening toward the other room— 
then it leaps high, the shadows drawing inward again, 

_ fully two feet, and disappears completely. Gas hisses on in 
_ the dim room. Milton Gloaming, who achieved perfect 
__ tripos at Cambridge ten years ago, abandons his shorthand 
_ to rise and go shut the gas off. 

___ It seems the right moment now for Jessica to throw a 
he dart: one dart. Hair swinging, breasts bobbing marvel- 
_ ously beneath each heavy wool lapel. A hiss of air, whack: 
into the sticky fibers, into the dead center. Milton Gloam- 
ng cocks an eyebrow. His mind, always gathering corre- 
_ spondences, thinks it has found a new one. 

_ The medium, irritable now, has begun to drift back out 

_ of his trance. Anybody’s guess what’s happening over on 
_ the other side. This sitting, like any, needs not only its 
congenial circle here and secular, but also a basic, four- 


: 


Jarroll Eventyr (the medium), Selena (the wife and 
survivor). Somewhere, through exhaustion, redirection, 


36 Gravity's RAINBOW 


gusts of white noise out in the aether, this arrangement has 
begun now to dissolve. Relaxation, chairs squeaking, sighs 
and throatclearings... Milton Gloaming fusses with his 
notebook, shuts it abruptly. 

Presently Jessica comes wandering over. No sign of 
Roger and she’s not sure he wants her to come looking for 
him, and Gloaming, though shy, isn’t as horrid as some of 
Roger’s other friends. . 

\ “Roger says that now you'll count up all those words 
you copied and graph them or something,” brightly to head 
off any comment on the dart incident, which she’d rather 
avoid. “Do you do it only for séances?” 

“Automatic texts,” girl-nervous Gloaming frowns, nods, 
“one or two Quija-board episodes, yes yes... we-we're 
trying to develop a vocabulary of curves—certain pa- 
thologies, certain characteristic shapes you see—” 

“I’m not sure that I—” 

“Well. Recall Zipf’s Principle of Least Effort: if we plot 
the frequency of a word P sub n against its rank-order n 
on logarithmic axes,” babbling into her silence, even her 
bewilderment graceful, “we should of course get some- 
thing like a straight line... however we’ve data that sug- 
gest the curves for certain—conditions, well they’re 
actually quite different—schizophrenics for example tend 
to run a bit flatter in the upper part then progressively 
steeper—a sort of bow shape...I think with this chap, 
this Roland, that we're on to a classical paranoiac—” 

“Ha.” That's a word she knows. “Thought I saw you 
brighten up there when he said ‘turned against.’ ” 

“Against, ‘opposite,’ yes you'd be amazed at the fre- 
quency with this one.” 

“What’s the most frequent word?” asks Jessica. “Your 
number one.” 

“The same as it’s always been at these affairs,” —- 
the statistician, as if everyone knew: “death.” 

An elderly air-raid warden, starchy and frail as organ 
stands on tiptoe to relight the sensitive flame. 

“Incidentally, ah, where’s your mad ss gentleman 
gone off to?” 

“Roger’s with Captain Prentice.” Waving Laatisly “The 
usual Mysterious Microfilm Drill. oe in 


some distant room, across a crown- r game with 


aes : 


Beyond the Zero ; 37 


which chance has very little to do, billows of smoke and 
chatter, Falkman and His Apache Band subdued over the 
BBC, chunky pints and slender sherry glasses, winter rain 
at the windows. Time for closeting, gas logs, shawls against 
the cold night, snug with your young lady or old ‘dutch or, 
as here at Snoxall’s, in good company. Here’s a shelter— 
perhaps a real node of tranquillity among several scattered 
throughout this long wartime, where they’re gathering for 
purposes not entirely in the martial interest. 

Pirate Prentice feels something of this, obliquely, by way 
of class nervousness really: he bears his grin among these 
people here like a phalanx. He learned it at the films—it 
is the exact mischievous Irish grin your Dennis Morgan 
chap goes about cocking down at the black smoke vomit- 
ing from each and every little bucktooth yellow rat he 
shoots down. - 

It’s as useful to him as he is to the Firm—who, it is well 
known, will use anyone, traitors, murderers, perverts, Ne- 
groes, even women, to get what They want. They may 
not’ve been that sure of Pirate’s usefulness at first, but 
me as it developed, They were to grow very sure, in- 

ee 
ae “Major-General, you can’t actually give your support to 

So 

“We're watching him around the clock. He certainly 
isn’t leaving the premises physically.” 

“Then he has a confederate. Somehow—hypnosis, drugs, 
I don’t know—they’re getting to his man and tranquilizing 
him. For God’s sake, next you'll be consulting horoscopes.” 

“Hitler does.” : 

“Hitler is an inspired man. But you and I are employers, 
remember. . 

After that first surge of interest, the number of clients 
assigned to Pirate tapered off some. At the moment he 
carries what he feels is a comfortable case load. But it’s 
not what he really wants. They will not understand, the 
_ gently bred maniacs of S.0.E. ah very good, Captain 
rattling sitreps, shuffling boots, echoes off of Government 
eyeglasses jolly good and why not do it actually for us 
sometime at the Club. . 

Pirate wants Their trust, the good-whisky-and-cured- 
. Latakia scent of Their rough love. He wants understand- 


38 Gravity's RAINBOW 


ing from his own lot, not these bookish sods and rational- 
ized freaks here at Snoxall’s, so dedicated to Science, so 
awfully tolerant that this (he regrets it with all his heart) 
may be the only place in the reach of war’s empire that he 
does feel less than a stranger.... 

“It’s not at all clear,” Roger. Mexico’s been saying, 
“what they have in mind, not at all, the Witchcraft Act’s 
more than 200 years old, it’s a relic of an entirely different 
age, another way of thinking. Suddenly here we are 1944 
being hit with convictions right and left. Our Mr. Even- 
tyr,” motioning at the medium who's across the room 
chatting with young Gavin Trefoil, “could be fallen upon 
at any moment—pouring in the windows, hauling dan- 
gerous tough Eventyr away to the Scrubs on pretending - to - 
exercise - or - use - a - kind - of - conjuration - to - cause - the - 
spirits - of - deceased - persons - to - be - present - in - fact - 
at- the - place - where - he - then - was - and - that - those - 
spirits - were - communicating - with - living - persons - then - 
and - there - present my God what imbecile Fascist rot .. .” 

“Careful, Mexico, you're losing the old objectivity 
again—a man of science shouldn’t want to do that, should 
he. Hardly scientific, is it.” 

“Ass. You're on their side. Couldn’t you feel it tonight, 
coming in the door? It’s a great swamp of paranoia.” © 

“That’s my talent, all right,” Pirate as he speaks know- 
ing it’s too abrupt, tries to file off the flash with: “I don’t 
know that I’m really up to the multiple sort of thing. . . .” 

“Ah. Prentice.” Not an eyebrow or lip out of place. 
Tolerance. Ah. be ig: 

“You ought to come down this time and have our Dr. 
Groast check it out on his EEG.” 

“Oh, if I’m in town,” vaguely. There’s a security prob- 
lem here. Loose talk sinks ships and he can’t be sure, even 
about Mexico. There are too many circles to the current 
operation, inner and outer. Distribution lists growing nar- 
rower as we move ring by ring toward the bull’s eye, In- 
structions To Destroy gradually eneomimaiye every scrap, 
idle memo, typewriter ribbon. 

His best guess is that Mexico only eles then sup- 
ports the Firm’s-latest mania, known as Operation Black 
Wing, in a statistical way—enalyzing what’ foreign-morale 


? 


ae 3 | rE the 
=o i er 


_ Beyond the Zero 39 


data may come in, for instance—but someplace out at the 
fringes of the enterprise, as indeed Pirate finds himself 
here tonight, acting as go-between for Mexico and his 
own roommate Teddy Bloat. 
He knows that Bloat goes somewhere and microfilms 
something, then transfers it, via Pirate, to young Mexico. 
. And thence, he gathers, down to “The White Visitation,” 
which houses a catchall agency known as PISCES— 
Psychological Intelligence Schemes for Expediting Sur- 
render. Whose surrender is not made clear. 

Pirate wonders if Mexico isn’t into yet another of the 
thousand dodgy intra-Allied surveillance schemes that 
have sprung up about London since the Americans, and a 

_dozen governments in exile, moved in. In which the Ger- 
man curiously fades into irrelevance. Everyone watching 

over his shoulder, Free French plotting revenge on Vichy 

_ traitors, Lublin Communists drawing beads on Varsovian 

_ shadow-ministers, ELAS Greeks stalking royalists, un- 
‘repatriable dreamers of all languages hoping through will, 
fists, prayer to bring back kings, republics, pretenders, 
summer anarchisms that perished before the first crops 
were in ...some dying wretchedly, nameless, under ice- 

', and-snow surfaces of bomb craters out in the East End not’ 

‘to be found till spring, some chronically drunk or opiated 

_ for getting through the day’s reverses, most somehow ~ 
losing, losing what souls they had, less and less able to 

trust, seized in the game’s unending chatter, its daily self- 

_ criticism, its demands for, total attention ...and what 
_ foreigner is it, exactly, that Pirate has in ening if it Ssa't 
that stateless lascar across his own mirror-glass, that poor- 

‘ est of exiles. . 

: Well: he guesses They have euchred Mexico into some 


such Byzantine exercise, probably to do with the Ameri- 
cans. Perhaps the Russians, “The White Visitation,” being 
~ devoted to psychological warfare, harbors a few of each, a 
_ Behaviorist here, a Pavlovian there, It’s none of Pirate’s 
business. But he notes that with each film delivery, Roger’s 
enthusiasm grows. Unhealthy, unhealthy: he has the sense 
of witnessing an addiction. He feels that his friend, his 
rovisional wartime friend, is being used for something not 
ats decent. 

What can he do? If Mexico wanted to talk about it he 


aS 


40 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


could find a way, security or not. His reluctance is not 
Pirate’s own over the machinery of Operation Black Wing. 
It looks more like shame. Wasn’t Mexico’s face tonight, as 
he took the envelope, averted? eyes boxing the corners of 
the room at top speed, a pornography customer's reflex... 
hmm. Knowing Bloat, perhaps that’s what it is, young lady 
gamming well-set-up young man, several poses—more 
wholesome than anything this war’s ever photographed... 
life, at least.... 

There’s Mexico’s girl, just entering the room. He spots 
her immediately, the clarity around her, the absence of 
smoke and noise...is he seeing auras now? She catches 
sight of Roger and smiles, her eyes enormous... dark- 
lashed, no make-up or none Pirate can see, her hair worn 
in a roll down to the shoulders—what the hell’s she doing 
in a mixed AA battery? She ought to be in a NAAFI can- 
teen, filling coffee cups. He is suddenly, dodderer and ass, 
taken by an ache in his skin, a simple love for them both 
that asks nothing but their safety, and that he'll always 
manage to describe as something else—“concern,” you 
know, “fondness. .. .” 

In 1936, Pirate (“a T. S. Eliot April” she called it, 
though it was a colder time of year) was in love with an 
executive’s wife. She was a thin, speedy stalk of a girl 
named Scorpia Mossmoon. Her husband Clive was an ex- 
pert in plastics, working out of Cambridge for Imperial 
Chemicals. Pirate, the career soldier, was having a year or 
two’s relapse or fling outside in civilian life. 

He'd got the feeling, stationed east of Suez, places like 
Bahrein, drinking beer watered with his own falling sweat 
in the perpetual stink of crude oil across from Muharraq, 
restricted to quarters after sundowpa—g8% venereal rate 
anyway—one sunburned, scroungy unit of force preserving 
the Sheik and the oil money against any threat from east of 
the English Channel, horny, mad withthe itching of lice 
and heat rash (masturbating under these conditions is ex- 
quisite torture), bitter-drunk all the time-——even so there 
had leaked through to Pirate a dim suspicion that sn was 
passing him by. 

Incredible blabkeanceidaie Scorpia confirmed not a few 
Piratical fantasies about the glamorous silken-calved En- 
glish realworld he’d felt so shut away from. They got to- 


ae 


+ 


we Beyond the Zero 41 


gether while Clive was away on a troubleshooting mission 
_ for ICI in, of all places, Bahrein. The symmetry of this 
helped Pirate relax about it some. They would attend 
parties as strangers, though she never learned to arm her- 
self against unexpected sight of him across a room (trying 
to belong, as if he were not someone’s employee). She 
found him touching in his ignorance of everything—par- 
tying, love, money—felt worldly and desperately caring for 
this moment of boyhood among his ways imperialized and 
set (he was 33), his pre-Austerity, in which Scorpia 
figured as his Last Flmg—though herself too young to 
_ know that, to know, like Pirate, what the lyrics to “Danc- 
_ ing in the Dark” are really about.... 

He will be scrupulous about never telling her. But there 
are times when it’s agony not to go to her feet, knowing 
she won't leave Clive, crying you're my last chance... if 

4 : it can’t be you then there’s no more time. ... Doesn’t he 
_ wish, against all hope, that he could let the poor, Western- 
man’s timetable go...but how does a man... where 
' does he even begin, at: age 33.... But that’s just it” she’d 
_ have laughed, not so much annoyed (she would have 
_ laughed) as tickled by the unreality of the problem—her- 
_. self too lost at the manic edge of him, always at engage, 
so taking, cleaving her (for more than when jerking. off 
_ into an Army flannel in the Persian Gulf was some collar 
of love’s nettles now at him, at his cock), too unappeas- 
able for her not to give in to the insanity of, but too in- 
sane really even to think of as any betrayal of Clive.... 
Convenient as hell for her, anyway. Roger Mexico is 
now going through much the same thing with Jessica, the 
_ Other Chap in this case being known as Beaver. Pirate has 
looked on but never talked about it to Mexico. Yes he is 
waiting, to see if it will end for Roger the same way, part 
of him, never so cheery as at the spectacle of another's 
misfortune, rooting for Beaver and all that he, like Clive, 
_ stands for, to win out. But another part—an alternate 
selff—one that he mustn’t be quick to call “decent”—does 
seem to want for Roger what Pirate himself lost.... 
__ “You are a pirate,” she’d whispered the last day—neither 
of them knew it was the last day—‘“you’ve come and 
taken me off on your pirate ship. A girl of good family 
and the usual repressions. You've raped me. And I’m the 


42 Gravity's Ramnsow 


Red Bitch of the High Seas....” A lovely game. Pirate 
wished she’d thought it up sooner. Fucking the last (al- 
ready the last) day’s light away down afternoon to dusk, 
hours of fucking, too in love with it to uncouple, they 
noticed how the borrowed room rocked gently, the ceiling 
obligingly came down a foot, lamps swayed from their 
fittings, some fraction of the Thameside traffic provided 
salty cries over the water, and nautical bells. .. . 

. But back over their lowering sky-sea behind, Govern- 
ment hounds were on the track—drawing closer, the cut- 
ters are coming, the cutters and the sleek hermaphrodites 
of the law, agents who, being old hands, will settle for her 
safe return, won’t insist on his execution or capture. Their 
logic is sound: give him a bad enough wound and he'll 
come round, round to the ways of this hard-boiled old egg 
of world and timetables, cycling night to compromise 
night.... 

He left her at Waterloo Station. A gala crowd was 
there, to see Fred Roper’s Company of Wonder Midgets 
off to an imperial fair in Johannesburg, South Africa. Midg- 
ets in their dark winter clothes, exquisite little frocks and 
nip-waisted overcoats, were running all over the station, 
gobbling their bonvoyage chocolates and lining up for 
news photos. Scorpia’s talc-white face, through the last 
window, across the last gate, was a blow to his heart. A 
flurry of giggles and best wishes arose from the Wonder 
Midgets and their admirers. Well, thought Pirate, guess 
Tl go back in the Army.... 


O 


They're bound eastward now, Roger peering over the 
wheel, hunched Dracula-style inside his Burberry, Jessica 
with bright millions of droplets still clinging in soft net to 
her shoulders and sleeves of drab wool. They want to be 
together, in bed, at rest, in love, and instead it’s eastward 
tonight and south of the Thames to rendezvous with a 
certain high-class vivisectionist before the clock of St. 
Felix chimes one. And when the mice run down, who 
knows tonight but what they’ve run for P 

Her face against the breath-fogged window has become 
another dimness, another light-trick of the winter. Beyond 


Beyond the Zero 43 


her, the white fracture of the rain passes. “Why does he 
go out and pinch all his dogs in person? He’s an admin- 
istrator, isn’t he? Wouldn’t he hire.a boy or something?” 

“We call them ‘staff, ” Roger replies, “and I don't 
know why Pointsman does anything he does, he’s a 
Pavlovian, love. He’s a Royal Fellow. What am I sup- 
. posed to know about any of those neriret They’re as diffi- 
cult as the lot back in Snoxall’s.” 

They’re both of them gaerisl tonight, whippy as sheets 
of glass improperly annealed, ready to go smash at any 
indefinite touch in a whining matrix of stresses— 

“Poor Roger, poor lamb, he’s having an awful war.” 

“All right,” his head shaking, a fuming b or p that re- 
fuses to explode, “ahh, you're so clever aren’t you,” raving 

' Roger, hands off the wheel to help the words out, wind- 
screen wipers clicking right along, “you've been able to 
shoot back now and then at the odd flying buzz bomb, 
you and the boy friend dear old Nutria—” 

“Beaver.” 

“Quite right, and all that magnificent esprit you lot are 
so justly famous for, but you haven’t brought down many 
rockets lately have you, haha!” guming his most spiteful 
pursed smile up against wrinkled nose and eyes, “any more 
than I, any more than Pointsman, well who’s that make 

purer than whom these days, eh mylove?” bouncing up 
_ and down in the leather seat. 
By now her hand’s reaching out, about to touch his 
shoulder. She rests her cheek on her own arm, hair spilling, 
drowsy, watching him. Can’t get a decent argument going 
with her. How he’s tried. She uses her silences like strok- 
ing hands to divert him and hush their comers of rooms, 
_ bedcovers, tabletops—accidental spaces.... Even at the 
cinema watching that awful Going My Way, the day they 
_ met, he saw every white straying of her ungauntleted 
hands, could feel in his skin each saccade of her olive, her 
amber, her coffee-colored eyes. He’s wasted gallons of 
paint thinner striking his faithful Zippo, its charred wick, 
virility giving way to thrift, rationed down to a little stub, 

the blue flame sparlkinie about the edges in the dark, the 


‘ee Each new Titost a new face. 
And there’ve been the moments, more of them lately 
imes when face-to-face there has been no way to 


44 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


tell which of them is which. Both at the same time feeling 
the same eerie confusion... something like looking in a 
mirror by surprise but... more than that, the feeling of 
actually being joined...when after—who knows? two 
minutes, a week? they realize, separate again, what’s been 
going on, that Roger and Jessica were merged into a joint 
creature unaware of itself.... In a life he has cursed, 
again and again, for its need to believe so much in the 
trans-observable, here is the first, the very first real magic: 
data he can’t argue away. 

It was what Hollywood likes to call a “cute meet,” out in 
the neat 18th-century heart of downtown Tunbridge Wells, 
Roger motoring in the vintage Jaguar up to London, 
Jessica at the roadside struggling prettily with a busted 
bicycle, murky wool ATS skirt hiked up on a handle bar, 
most nonregulation black slip and clear pearl thighs above 
the khaki stockings, well— 

“Here love,” brakes on in a high squeak, “it’s not back- 
stage at the old Windmill or something, you know.” 

She knew. “Hmm,” a curl dropping down to tickle her — 
nose and put a bit more than the usual acid in her reply, 
“are they letting little boys into places like that, I didn’t 
know.” 

“Well nobody’s,” having learned by now to live with 
remarks about his appearance, “called up the Girl Guides 
yet either, have they.” 

“Tm twenty.” 

“Hurrah, that qualifies you for a ride, in this Jaguar 
here you see, all the way to London.” 

“But I’m going the other way. Nearly to Battle.” 

“Oh, round trip of course.” ' 

Shaking hair back out of her face, “Does your mother 
know you're out like this.” ome 

“My mother is the war,” declares Roger Mexico, leaning 
over to open the door. mera ee ; ; 

“That’s a queer thing to say,” one muddy little shoe 
pondering on the running board. 

“Come along, love, you're holding up the mission, leave - 
the machine where it is, mind your skirt getting in, I 
wouldn’t want to commit an unspeakable! act out here in _ 
the streets of Tunbridge Wells—” { 

At which moment the rocket falls. Cu; 


cute, A thud, a 
hollow drumroll. Far enough toward the 


city to be safe, 
mee 


} +i" 
om 
Pa 


Beyond the Zero 45 


but close and loud enough to send her the hundred miles 
between herself and the stranger: long-swooping, balletic, 
her marvelous round bottom turning to settle in the other 
seat, hair in a moment’s fan, hand sweeping Army-colored 
skirt under graceful as a wing, all with the blast still 
reverberating. 

He thinks he can see a solemn gnarled something, 
deeper or changing faster than clouds, rising to the north, 
Will she snuggle now cutely against him, ask him to pro- 
tect her? He didn’t even believe she'd get in the car, 
rocket or no rocket, accordingly now puts Pointsman’s 
Jaguar somehow into reverse instead of low, yes, backs 
over the bicycle, rendering it in a great crunch useless for 

/ anything but scrap. 

“Tm in your power,” she cries. “Utterly.” 

“Hmm,” Roger at length finding his gear, dancing among 

_ the pedals rrm, snarl, off to London. But Jessica’s not in 

his power, 

_ And the war, well, she is Roger’s mother, she’s leached 
at all the soft, the vulnerable inclusions of hope and praise 
scattered, beneath the mica-dazzle, through Roger’s min- 

eral, grave-marker self, washed it all moaning away on 

her gray tide. Six years now, always just in sight, just 

_ where he can see her. He’s forgotten his first corpse, or 

_ when he first saw someone living die. That’s how long it’s 

been going on. Most of his life, it seems. The city he 

_ visits nowadays is Death’s antechamber: where all the 
paperwork’s done, the contracts signed, the days num- 

_ bered. Nothing of the grand; garden, adventurous capital 

3 his childhood knew. He’s become the Dour Young Man of 

_ “The White Visitation,” the spider hitching together his 

_ web of numbers. It’s an open secret that he doesn’t get on 

- with the rest of his section. How can he? They’re all wild 

_ talents—clairvoyants and mad magicians; telekinetics, 

astral travelers, gatherers of light. Roger’s only a satistician. 

‘Never had a prophetic dream, never sent or got a tele- 

‘pathic message, never touched the Other World directly. 

If anything’s there it will show in the experimental data 

on’t it, in the numbers... but that’s as close or clear as 

ell ever get. Any wonder he’s a bit short with Psi Section, 
the definitely 3-sigma lot up and down his basement 
idor? Jesus Christ, wouldn’t you be? 

That one clear need of theirs, so patent, exasperates 


46 Gravity's RAINBOW 


him.... His need too, all right. But how-are you ever 
going to put anything “psychical” on a scientific basis with 
your mortality always goading, just outside the chi-square 
calculations, in between the flips of the Zener cards and 
the silences among the medium’s thick, straining utter- 
ances? In his mellower moments he thinks that continuing 
to try makes him brave. But most of the time he’s cursing 
himself for not working in fire control, or graphing Stap- 
dardized Kill Rates Per Ton for the bomber groups... 
anything but this thankless meddling into the affairs of 
' invulnerable Death... . 

They have drawn near a glow over the rooftops. Fire 
Service vehicles come roaring by them, heading the same 
direction. It is an oppressive region of brick streets and 
silent walls. 

Roger brakes for a crowd of sappers, fcehghters, neigh- 
bors in dark coats over white nightclothes, old ladies who 
have a special place in their night-thoughts for the Fire 
Service no please youre not going to use that great Hose 
on me...oh no... aren't you even going to take off those 
horrid rubber boots . . yesyes that’ s— 

Soldiers stand euiay few yards, a loose cordon, unmoy- 
ing, a bit supernatural. The Battle of Britain was hardly 
so formal, But these new robot bombs bring with them 
chances for public terror no one has sounded; Jessica notes 
a coal-black Packard up a side street, filled with dark- 
suited civilians. Their white collars rigid in the shadows. 

“Who’re they?” 

He shrugs: “they” is good enough. “Not a friendly lot.” 

“Look who’s talking.” But their smile is old, habitual, 
There was a time when his job had her a bit mental; 
lovely little scrapbooks on the flying bombs, how sweet. . 
And his irritated sigh: Jess don’t make me out some al | 
fanatical man of science. 

Heat beats at their facaa eye-searing yellow when the 
streams shoot into the fire. A ladder hooked to the edge of - 
the roof sways in the violent drafts, Up top, against the 
sky, figures in slickers brace, wave arms, move together to 
pass orders. Half a block down, flare lamps illuminate the 
rescue work in the charry wet wreckage. From trailer 
pumps and heavy units, canvas hoses run fat with pres- 
sure, hastily threaded unions sending out stars of cold | 


faa 


Beyond the Zero ae 


spray, bitter cold, that flash yellow when the fire leaps. 
Somewhere over a radio comes a woman’s voice, a quiet 
Yorkshire girl, dispatching other units to other parts of the 
city. 
Once Roger and Jessica might have stopped. But they’re 
both alumni of the Battle of Britain, both have been 
drafted into the early black mornings and the crying for 
mercy, the dumb inertia of cobbles and beams, the pro- 
found shortage of mercy in those days.... By the time 
one has pulled one’s nth victim or part of a victim free 
of one’s nth pile of rubble, he told her once, angry, weary, 
it has ceased to be that personal ... the value of n may be 
_ different for each of us, but I’m sorry: sooner or later... 
’ And past the exhaustion with it there is also this. If they 
have not quite seceded from war’s state, at least they've 
found the beginnings of gentle withdrawal... there’s 
_ never been the space or time to talk about it, and per- 
haps no need—but both know, clearly, it’s better together, 
snuggled in, than back out in the paper, fires, khaki, steel 
__.of the Home Front. That, indeed, the Home Front is some- 
thing of a fiction and lie, designed, not too subtly, to draw 
_ them apart, to subvert love in favor of work, abstraction, 
- required pain, bitter death. 
__ They have found a house in the stay-away zone, under 
the barrage balloons south of: London. The town, evacu- 
ated in *40, is still “regulated”—still on the Ministry's 
list. Roger and Jessica occupy the place illegally, in a 
_ defiance they can never measure unless they're caught. 
_ Jessica has brought an old doll, seashells, her aunt’s grip 
_ filled with lace knickers and silk stockings, Roger’s man- 
_ aged to scare up a few chickens to nest in the empty ga- 
_ Tage. Whenever they meet here, one always remembers to 
“bring a fresh flower or two. The nights are filled with ex- 
plosion and motor transport, and wind that brings them 
up over the downs a last smack of the sea. Day begins 
_ with a hot cup and a cigarette over a little table with a 
weak leg that Roger has repaired, provisionally, with 
brown twine. There’s never much talk but touches and 
looks, smiles together, curses for parting. It is marginal, 
hungry, chilly—most times they're too paranoid to risk a 
-but it’s something they want to keep, so much that 
<eep it they will take on more than propaganda has 
ever asked them for. They are in love. Fuck the war. 


48 Gravirty’s RAInsow > 


O 


Tonight’s quarry, whose name will be Vladimir (or Ilya, 
Sergei, Nikolai, depending on the doctor’s whim), slinks 
carefully toward the cellar entrance. This jagged opening 
ought to lead to something deep and safe. He has the 

memory, or reflex, of escaping into similar darkness from 
an Irish setter who. smells of coal smoke and will attack 
on sight... once from a pack of children, recently froma 
sudden blast of noiselight, a fall of masonry that caught 
him on the left hindquarter (still raw, still needs licking). 
But tonight’s threat is something new: not so violent, in- 
stead a systematic stealth he isn’t used to. Life out here is 
more direct. 

It’s raining. The wind hardly flickers. It brings a scent 
he finds strange, never having been near a laboratory in 
his life. 

The smell is ether, it emanates from Mr. Edward W. A. 
Pointsman, F.R.C.S. As the dog vanishes around the 
broken remnant of a wall, just as the tip of his tail flicks 
away, the doctor steps into the white waiting throat of a 
toilet bowl he has not, so intent on his prey, seen. He 
bends over, awkwardly, tugging loose the bowl from its 


surrounding debris, muttering oaths against all the care-. 


less, meaning not himself, particularly, but the owners of 
this ruined flat (if they weren’t killed in the blast) or 
whoever failed to salvage this bowl, which seems, actually, 
to be wedged on rather tight. ... . 
Mr. Pointsman drags his leg over to a shattered stair- 


case, swings it quietly, so as not to alarm the dog, against _ 
the lower half of a fumed-oak newel post. The bow! only 


clanks back, the wood shudders. Mocking him—all right. 
He sits on stairsteps ascending to open sky and attempts to 
pull the damned thing loose of his foot. It will not come. 
He hears the invisible dog, toenails softly clicking, gain 
the sanctuary of the cellar. He can’t reach inside the 
toilet bowl even to untie his fucking boot. .|. . 


Settling the window of his Balaclava helmet snug and | 


tickling just under his nose, resolved not |to give way to 
panic, Mr. Pointsman stands up, has to wait for blood to 


EMA 
aA 


Beyond the Zero. 49 


drain, resurge, bounce up and down its million branches 
in the drizzly night, percolate to balance—then limping, 


clanking, he heads back toward the car to get a hand from 


young Mexico, who did remember, he hopes, to bring the 
electric lantern... . 

Roger and Jessica found him a bit earlier, lurking at the 
end of a street of row houses. The V-bomb whose mutila- 


_ tion he was prowling took down four dwellings the other 


day, four exactly, neat as surgery. There is the soft smell 
of house-wood down before its time, of ashes matted 
down by the rain. Ropes are strung, a sentry lounges 
silent against the doorway of an intact house next to where 


’ the rubble begins. If he and the doctor have chatted at 


all, neither gives a sign now. Jessica sees two eyes of no 
particular color glaring out the window of a Balaclava 
helmet, and is reminded of a mediaeval knight wearing a 


_ casque. What creature is he possibly here tonight to fight 


for his king? The rubble waits him, sloping up to broken 
rear walls in a clogging, an open-work of laths pointlessly 
chevroning—flooring, furniture, glass, chunks of plaster, 
long tatters of wallpaper, split and shattered joists: some 


_ woman’s long-gathered nest, taken back to separate straws, 


flung again to this wind and this darkness. Back in the 
wreckage a brass bedpost winks; and twined there some- 
one’s brassiere, a white, prewar confection of lace and 
satin, simply left tangled.... For an instant, in a vertigo 


_ she can’t control, all the pity laid up in her heart flies to 


were 


a ss 


it, as it would to a small animal stranded and forgotten. 
Roger has the boot of the car open. The two men are 
rummaging, coming up with large canvas sack, flask of 
ether, net, dog whistle. She knows she must not cry: that 
the vague eyes in the knitted window won't seek their 
Beast any more earnestly for her tears. But the poor lost 


flimsy thing...waiting in the night and rain for its 


owner, for its room to reassemble round it... 
.The night, full of fine rain, smells like a wet dog. Points- 
man seems to’ve been away for a bit. “I’ve lost my mind. 


I ought to be cuddling someplace with Beaver this very 
‘minute, watching him light up his Pipe, and here instead 


Tm with this gillie or something, nes spiritualist, statisti- 


“a what are you anyway—” 


50 Gravity's RaInBsow 


“Cuddling?” Roger has a tendency to scream, “Cud- 
dling?” 

“Mexico.” It’s the doctor, sighing, toilet bowl on his 
foot and knitted helmet askew. 

“Hello, doesn’t that make it difficult for you to walk? 
should think it would... up here, first get it in the door, 
this way, and, ah, good,” then closing the door again 
around Pointsman’s ankle, the bowl now occupying Roger's 

. seat, Roger half-resting on Jessica’s lap, “tug now, hard as 
ever you can.” 

Thinking young prig and mocking ass the doctor rocks 
back on his free leg, grunting, the bowl wallowing to and 
fro. Roger holds the door and peers attentively into where 
the foot vanished. “If we had a bit of Vaseline, we could— 
something slippery. Wait! Stay there, Pointsman, don’t 
move, we'll have this resolved... .” Under the car, impul- 
sive lad, in search of the crankcase plug by the time 
Pointsman can say, “There isn’t time Mexico, he'll escape, 
he'll escape.” 

“Quite right.” Up again fumbling a flashlight from his 
jacket pocket. “Ill flush him out, you wait with the net. 
Sure you can get about all right? Nasty if you fell or 
something just as he made his break for the open.” 

“For pity’s sake,” Pointsman thumping after him back 
into the wreckage. “Don’t frighten him Mexico, this isn’t 
Kenya or something, we need him as close to normative, 
you know, as possible.” 

Normative? Normative? 

“Roger,” calls Roger, giving him short-long-short with 
the flash. tS 

“Jessica,” murmurs Jessica, tiptoeing behind them. — 

“Here, fellow,” coaxes Roger. “Nice bottle of ether here 
for you,” opening the flask, waving it in the cellar en- 
trance, then switching on his beam. Dog looks up out of 
an old rusted pram, bobbing black shadows, tongue hang- 
ing, utter skepticism on his face. “Why it’s. Mrs, aed 
baum!” Roger cries, the same way he’s heard Fred Allen 
do, Wednesday nights over the BBC. 

“You vere ekshpecting maybe LessieP”' replies the ree : 

Roger can smell ether fumes quite strongly as he starts 
his cautious descent. “Come on mate, il be over before 
you know it. Pointsman just wants to count the old oe | 
| 

[ 


x7 ab gt 
3 a (Se 


‘s Beyond the Zero b 51 


of saliva, that’s all, Wants to make a wee inigion in your 
_ cheek, nice glass tube, nothing to bother aout, right? 
Ring a bell now and then, Exciting world of te Jabora- 
tory, you'll love it.” Ether seems to be getting tohim, He 
tries to stopper the flask: takes a step, foot plunge. into a 
hole. Lurching sideways, he gropes for something to seady 
'. himself. The stopper falls back out of the flask ani in 
- forever among the debris at the bottom of the smasted 
_ house. Overhead Pointsman cries, “The sponge, Mexico, 
_ you forgot the sponge!” down comes a round pale collec- 
_ tion of holes, bouncing in and out of the light of the flash. 
_ “Frisky chap,” Roger making a two-handed grab for it, 
_ splashing ether liberally about. He locates the sponge at 
_ last in his flashlight beam, the dog looking on from the 
pram in some confusion. “Hah!” pouring ether to drench 
_ the. sponge. and go wisping cold off his hand till the 
_ flask’s empty. Taking the wet sponge between two fingers 
vs, he staggers toward the dog, shining the light up from 
___under his chin to highlight the vampire face he thinks he’s 
4 making. “Moment—of truth!” He lunges. The dog leaps 
off at an angle, streaking past Roger toward the entrance 
4 while Roger keeps going with his sponge, headfirst into 
* the pram, which collapses under his weight. Dimly he 
hears the: doctor above whimper, “He’s getting away. 
Mexico, do hurry.” 
. . “Hurry.” Roger, clutching the sponge, extricates him- 
_ self from the infant’s vehicle, taking it off as if it were a 
Bs ‘shirt, with what seems to him not unathletic skill. 
ae “Mexico-o-o,”; plaintive. 
__. “Right,” Roger blundering up the cellar’s rubble to the 
hi outside again, where he beholds the doctor closing in on 
the dog, net held aloft and outspread. Rain falls per- 
tently over this tableau. Roger circles so as to make 
th Pointsman,a-pincer upon the animal, who now stands 
1 paws: planted and. teeth showing near one of the 
“Pieces of rear wall still standing. Jessica waits halfway 
into it, hands in her pockets; smoking, watching. 
__ “Here,” hollers the sentry, “you. You idiots. Keep away 
_ from that bit of wall, there’s nothing to hold it up.” 
“Do you have any cigarettes?” asks Jessica. 
“He's going to bolt,” Roger screams. 
__. “For God’s sake, Mexico, slowly now.” Testing each 


52 Gravirty’s Rainsow 

footstep, move upslope over the ruin’s delicate bal- 
ance. It’s A system of lever arms that can plunge them 
into deadly collapse at any moment. They draw near their 


quarry ho scrutinizes now the doctor, now Roger, with 
quic hifts of his head. He growls tentatively, tail keep- 
ing Ap a steady slap against the two sides of the corner 
they've backed him into. 

As Roger, who carries the light, moves rearward, the 
og, some circuit of him, recalls the other light that came 
from behind in recent days—the light that followed the 
/ great blast so seethed through afterward by pain and 
“gold. Light from the rear signals death / men with nets 
about to leap can be avoided— 

“Sponge,” screams the doctor. Roger flings himself at 
the dog, who has taken off in Pointsman’s direction and 
away toward the street whilst Pointsman, groaning, swings 
his toiletbowl. foot desperately, misses, momentum carry-— 
ing him around a full tum, net up like a radar antenna. 
Roger, snoot full of ether, can’t check his lunge—as the 
doctor comes spinning round again Roger careens on into 
him, toilet bow! hitting Roger a painful thump in the leg. 
The two men fall over, tangled in the net now covering 
them. Broken beams creak, chungs of rain-wet plaster 
tumble. Above them the unsupported wall begins to sway. 

“Get out of there,” hollers the sentry. But the efforts'of 
the pair under the net to move away only rock the wall 
more violently. 

“We're for it,” the doctor shivers. Roger seeks his eyes 
to see if he means it, but the window of the Balaclava 
helmet now contains only a white ear and fringe of hair. 

“Roll,” Roger suggests. They contrive to roll a few 
yards down toward the street, by which time part of the 
wall has collapsed, in the other direction. They manage to 
get back to Jessica without ing any more damage. 

“He’s run down the street, she mentions, helping them 
out of the net. 

“Tt’s all right,” the doctor sighs. “It nies make any 
difference.” 

“Ah but the evening’ s young,” from ent 

“No, no. Forget it.” 
“What will you do for a dog, then.” 
They are under way again, Roger at ow wheel, Jessica 


P. 


: Beyond the Zero 53 
_ between them, toilet bowl out a half-open door, before 

_ the answer. “Perhaps it’s a sign. Perhaps I should be . 
' branching out.” 

Roger gives him a quick look. Silence, Mexico. Try not 
to think about what that means. He’s not one’s superior 
after all, both report to the old Brigadier at “The White 
Visitation” on, so far as he knows, equal footing. But 
sometimes—Roger glances again across Jessica’s dark wool 
- bosom at the knitted head, the naked nose and eyes—he 
_ thinks the doctor wants more than his good will, his 
- collaboration. But wants him. As one wants a fine speci- 

men of dog. ... ‘ 
_ Why’s he here, then, assisting at yet another dognap- 
_ ping? What stranger does he shelter in him so mad— 
“Will you be going back down tonight, doctor? The 
young lady needs a ride.” if 
“I shan’t, Pll be staying in. But you might take the car 
__ back. I must talk with Dr. Spectro.” 
__- They are approaching now a lengthy brick improvisa- 
|. tion, a Victorian paraphrase of what once, long ago, re- 
_ sulted in Gothic cathedrals—but which, in its own time, 
_ arose not from any need to climb through the fashioning 
0 of suitable confusions toward any apical God, but more in 
a derangement of aim, a doubt as to the God’s actual 
locus (or, in some, as to its very existence), out of a cruel 
network of sensuous moments that could not be tran- 
_ Scended and so bent the intentions of the builders not on 
_ any zenith, but back to fright, to simple escape, in what- 
b ever direction, from what the industrial smoke, street 
_ excrement, windowless warrens, shrugging leather forests 
of drive belts, flowing and patient shadow states of the 
tats and flies, were saying about the chances for mercy 
that year, The grimed brick sprawl is known as the Hospi- 
tal of St. Veronica of the True Image for Colonic and 
_ Respiratory Diseases, and one ofits residents is a Dr. 
evin Spectro, neurologist and casual Pavlovian. 
\ Spectro is one of the original seven owners of The Book, 
and if you ask Mr. Pointsman what Book, you'll only get 
ked at. It rotates, the mysterious Book, among its co- 
A whers on a weekly basis, and this, Roger gathers, is 
pectros week to get dropped in on at all hours. Others, 
“ n, Pointsman’s weeks, have come the same way to “The 


“A 


54 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


White Visitation” in the night, Roger has heard their 
earnest, conspirators’ whispering in the corridors, the 
smart rattle of all their shoes, like dancing pumps on 
marble, destroying one’s repose, refusing ever to die with 
distance, Pointsman’s voice and stride always distinct 
from the rest. How’s it going to sound now with a toilet 
bowl? 

Roger and Jessica leave the doctor at a side entrance, 
into which he melts, leaving nothing but rain dripping 
from slopes and serifs of an unreadable legend on the 
lintel. 

They turn southward. Lights on the dash glow warmly. 
Searchlights rake the raining sky. The slender machine 
shivers over the roads, Jessica drifts toward sleep, the 
leather seat creaking as she curls about. Windscreen 
wipers brush the rain in a rhythmic bright warp. It is 
past two, and time for home. 


Oo 


Inside St. Veronica’s hospital they sit together, just off the 
war-neurosis ward, these habitual evenings. The autoclave 
simmers its fine clutter of steel bones. Steam drifts into 
the glare of the gooseneck lamp, now and then becoming 
very bright, and the shadows of the men’s gestures may 
pass through it, knife-edged, swooping very fast. But both 
faces are usually reserved, kept well back, in the annulus 
of night. 

Out of the blackness of the ward, a half-open file drawer 
of pain each bed a folder, come cries, struck cries, as from 
cold metal. Kevin Spectro will take his syringe and spike 
away a dozen times tonight, into the dark, to sedate Fox 
(his generic term for any patient—run three times around 
the building without thinking of a fox and you can cure 
anything). Pointsman will sit each time waiting for their 
talking to resume, glad to rest these moments in the half- 
darkness, the worn gold-leaf letters shining from the spines 
of books, the fragrant coffee mess besieged ‘by roaches, the 

_ winter rain in the downspout just ontenae the window. . 
“You're not looking any better.” fl 


“Ah, it’s the old bastard again, he’s got 'me down. This 


> 


i Beyond the Zero 55 
a 
; 


fighting, Spectro, every day, I don’t. pouting down- | 
ward at his eyeglasses that he’s wiping 0 on his shirt, “there’s 
more to damned Pudding than I can see, he’s always 

springing his . . . senile little surprises. . 
 . “Tt’s his age. Really.” 

“Oh, that I can deal with. But he’s so damned—such a 

. bastard, he never sleeps, he plots— 

“Not senility, no, I meant the position he’s working 
from, PointsmanP You don’t have the priorities he does 
quite yet, do youP You can’t take the chances he can. 
You've treated them that age, surely you know that 
strange... smugness. ...” 

_ Pointsman’s own Fox waits, out in the city, a prize of 
war. In here the tiny office space is the cave of an oracle: 
steam drifting, sybilline cries arriving out of the darkness 
... Abreactions of the Lord of the Night.... 

ie don’t like it, Pointsman. Since you did ask.” 

“Why not.” Silence, “Unethical?” 

- “For pity’s sake, is this ethical?” raising an arm then 

. toward the exit into the ward, almost a Fascist salute. 
' “No, I’m only trying to think of ways to justify it, experi- 

_ mentally. I can’t. It’s only one man.” 

_— “It’s Slothrop. You. know what he is. Even Mexico 
thinks... oh, the usual. Precognition. Psychokinesis. They 
have their own problems, that lot.... But suppose you 
_ had the chance to study a truly classical case of... some 
_ pathology, a perfect mechanism... .” 

__ One night Spectro asked: “If he hadn’t been one of 
_ Laszlo Jamf’s subjects, would you be all this keen on 
him?” 

5 “Of course I would.” 

fee: Him,” 

_ Imagine a missile one hears approaching only after it 

explodes. The reversal! A piece of time neatly snipped 

~out...a few feet of film run backwards... the blast of 
the rocket, fallen faster than sound—then growing out of 
it the roar of its own fall, catching up to what’s already 

fy death and burning ...a ghost in the sky. . 

“setae was fascinated with “ideas of the ‘opposite:” Call 


f 


—— 


56 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


starve them, traumatize, shock, castrate them, send them 
over into one of the transmarginal phases, past borders of 
their waking selves, past “equivalent” and “paradoxical” 
phases—you weaken this idea of the opposite, and here 
all at once is the paranoid patient who would be master, 
yet now feels himself a slave... who would be loved, but 
suffers his world’s indifference, and, “I think,” Pavlov 
writing to Janet, “it is precisely the ultraparadoxical phase 
which is the base of the weakening of the idea of the 
opposite in our patients.” Our madmen, our paranoid, 
maniac, schizoid, morally imbecile— 

Spectro shakes his head. “You're putting response be- 
fore stimulus.” 

“Not at all. Think of it. He’s out there, and he can 
feel them coming, days in advance. But it’s a reflex. A 
reflex to something that’s in the air right now. Something 
we're too coarsely put together to sense—but Slothrop 
can. 

“But that makes it extrasensory.” 

“Why not say ‘a sensory cue we just aren’t paying atten- 
tion to.’ Something that’s been there all along, something 
we could be looking at but no one is. Often, in our ex- 
periments...I believe M. K. Petrova was first to observe 
it... one of the women, quite early in the game really... 
the act merely of bringing the dog into the laboratory— 
especially in our experimental neurosis work... the 
sight of the test stand, of the technician, a stray shadow, 
the touch of a draft of air, some cue we might never pin 
down would be enough to send him over, send him ‘trans- 
marginal. 

“So, Slothrop. Conceivably. Out in the city, the am- 
bience alone—suppose we considered the war itself as a 
laboratory? when the V-2 hits, you see, first the blast, 
then the sound of its falling... the normal order of the 
stimuli reversed that way ...so he might turn a particular 
corner, enter a certain street, and for no clear reason feel 
suddenly . . 

Silence comes in, sculptured by spoken dreams, by pain- 
voices of the rocketbombed next door, Lord of the Night’s 
children, voices hung upon the ward’s stagnant medicinal 
air, Praying to their Master: sooner or later an absentia’, 
each one, all over this frost and harrowed city . 

. as once again the floor is a giant li propelling you 


| 


he : Beyond the Zero 57 


_ with no warning toward your ceiling—replaying now as 
the walls are blown outward, bricks and mortar showering 
» down, your sudden paralysis as death comes to wrap and 
' stun I don’t know guv I must've blacked out when I come 
to she was, gone it was burning all around me head was 
full of smoke... and the sight of your blood spurting from 
the flaccid stub of artery, the snowy roofslates fallen 
across half your bed, the cinema kiss never completed, you 
_ were pinned and stared at a crumpled cigarette. pack for 
two hours in pain, you could hear them crying from the 
rows either side but couldn’t move...the sudden light 
filling up the room, the awful silence, brighter than any 
_ morning through blankets turned to gauze no shadows at 
all, only unutterable two-o’clock dawn... and... 
2 ... this transmarginal leap, this surrender. Where ideas 
__ of the opposite have come together, and lost their opposite- 
ness, (And is it really the rocket explosion that Slothrop’s 
keying on, or is it exactly this depolarizing, this neurotic 
- “confusion” that fills the wards tonight?) How many times 
before it’s washed away, these iterations that pour out, 
_ reliving the blast, afraid to let go because the letting go is 
‘so final how do I know Doctor that I'll ever: come back? 
_and the answer trust us, after the rocket, is so hollow, only 
mummery—trust youP—and both know it.... Spectro 
feels so like a fraud but carries on... only because the 
pain continues to be real. ... 

And those who do let go at last: out of each catharsis 
rise new children, painless, egoless for one pulse of the 
Between... tablet erased, new writing about to begin, 
hand and chalk poised in winter gloom over these poor 
human palimpsests shivering under their government 
blankets, drugged, drowning in tears and snot of grief so 
real, torn from so deep that it surprises, seems more than 
he ir OWN. ... 

_ How Pointsman lusts after them, pretty children. Those 
drab undershorts of his are full to bursting with need 
norlessly, worldly to use their innocence, to write on 
em new words of himself, his own brown Realpolitik 
ams, some psychic prostate ever in aching love prom- 
ah hinted but till now... how seductively they lie 
ced in their iron bedsteads, their virginal sheets, the 
darlings so artlessly erotic.... : 

$t. Veronica’s Downtown Bus Station, their crossroads 


Sos = eel 


——_. -- —- 


~~. poe ee ee eee 


e 


58 Gravirty’s RaInsow 


(newly arrived on this fake parquetry, chewing-gum 
scuffed charcoal black, slicks of nighttime vomit, pale 
yellow, clear as the fluids of gods, waste newspapers or 
propaganda leaflets no one has read in torn scythe-shaped 
pieces, old nose-pickings, black grime that blows weakly 
in when the doors open...). 

You have waited in these places into the early mom- 
ings, synced in to the on-whitening of the interior, you 
know the Arrivals schedule by heart, by hollow heart. And 
where these children have run away from, and that, in this 
city, there is no one to meet them. You impress them with 
your gentleness. You’ve never quite decided if they can 
see through to your vacuum. They won’t yet look in your 
eyes, their slender legs are never still, knitted stockings 
droop (all elastic has gone to war), but charmingly: little 
heels kick restless against the canvas bags, the fraying 
valises under the wood bench. Speakers in the ceiling re- 
port departures and arrivals in English, then in the other, 
exile lariguages. Tonight’s child has had a long trip here, 
hasn’t slept. Her eyes are red, her frock wrinkled. Her 
coat has been a pillow. You feel her exhaustion, feel the 
impossible vastness of all the sleeping countryside at her 
back, and for the moment you really are selfless, sex- 
less... considering only how to shelter her, you are the 
Traveler’s Aid. 

Behind you, long, night-long queues of men in uniform 
move away slowly, kicking AWOL bags along, mostly 
silent, toward exit doors painted beige, but with edges 
smudged browner in bell-curves of farewell by the gen- 
eration of hands. Doors that only now and then open let 
in the cold air, take out a certain draft of men, and close 
again. A driver, or a clerk, stands by the door checking 
tickets, passes, furlough chits. One by one men step out 
into this perfectly black rectangle of night and disappear. 
Gone, the war taking them, the man behind already 
presenting his ticket. Outside motors are roaring: but less 
like transport than like some kind of stationary machine, 
very low earthquake frequencies coming in mixed with the 
cold—somehow intimating that out there your blindness, 
after this bright indoors, will be like a sudden blow. ... 
Soldiers, sailors, marines, airmen. One by one, gone. Those 
who happen to be smoking might last an instant longer, — 


Beyond the Zero 59 


- weak little coal swinging in orange arc once, twice—no 
more. You sit, half-turned to watch them, your soiled 
sleepy darling beginning to complain, and it’s no use— 
how can your lusts fit inside this same white frame with 
so much, such endless, departure? A thousand children 
are shuffling out these doors tonight, but only rare nights 
will even one come in, home to your sprung, spermy bed, 
the wind over the gasworks, closer smells of mold on wet 
coffee grounds, cat shit, pale sweaters with the pits heaped 
in a corner, in some accidental gesture, slink or embrace. 
This wordless ratcheting queue... thousands going away 

_ ... only the stray freak particle, by accident, drifting 

against the major flow.... 

Yet for all his agonizing all Pointsman will score, pres- 
ently, is an octopus—yes a gigantic, horror-movie develfish 
name of Grigori: gray, slimy, never still, shivering slow- 
motion in his makeshift pen down by the Ick Regis 
jetty ...a terrible wind that day off the Channel, Points- 

_man in his Balaclava helmet, eyes freezing, Dr. Porkye- 

_ vitch with greatcoat collar up and fur hat down around 
his ears, their breaths foul with hours-old fish, and what 

_ the hell can Pointsman do with this animal? 

Already, by itself, the answer is growing, one moment 
a featureless blastulablob, the next: folding, beginning to 
differentiate. . .. : 

One of the things Spectro said that night—surely it was 

_ that night—was, “I only wonder if you'd feel the same 

_ way without all those dogs about. If your subjects all 
along had been human.” 

__ “You ought to be offering me one or two, then, instead 
of—are you serious?—giant octopi.” The doctors are 
watching each other closely. 

“I wonder what you'll do.” 
© “So do I.” 

“Take the octopus.” Does he mean “forget Slothrop”? A 

charged moment. 

But then Pointsman laughs the well-known laugh that’s 
done him yeoman service in a profession where too often 
it’s hedge or hang. “I’m always being told to take animals.” 
He means that years ago a colleague—gone now—told 

him he’d be more human, warmer, if he kept a dog of his 
0 outside the lab. Pointsman tried—God knows he 


60 Gravity’s RaInsow 


did—it was a springer spaniel named Gloucester, pleasant 
enough animal, he supposed, but the try lasted less than 
a month. What finally irritated him out of all tolerance 
was that the dog didn’t know how to reverse its behavior. 
It could open doors to the rain and the spring insects, but 
not close them... knock over garbage, vomit on the floor, 
but not cleari it up—how could anyone live with such a 
creature? 

“Octopi,” Spectro wheedles, “are docile under surgery. 
They can survive massive removals of brain tissue. Their 
unconditioned response to prey is very reliable—show 
them a crab, WHAM! out wiv the old tentacle, home to 
poisoning and supper. And, Pointsman, they don’t bark.” 

“Oh, but. No... tanks, pumps, filtering, special food... 
that may be fine up in Cambridge, that lot, but every- 
one here’s so damned tightfisted, it’s the damned Rund- 
stedt offensive, has to be.... P.W.E. won't fund anything 
now unless it pays off tactically, immediately—last week 
you know, if not sooner. No an octopus is much too 
elaborate, not even Pudding would buy it, no not even 
old delusions-of-grandeur himself,” 

“No limit to the things you can teach them.” 

“Spectro, you're not the devil.” Looking closer, “Are 
you? You know we're set for sound stimuli, the whole 
thrust of this Slothrop scheme has to be auditory, the 
reversal is auditory.... I’ve seen an octopus brain or two 
in my time, mate, and don’t think I haven’t noticed those 
great blooming optic lobes. EhP You're trying to palm off a 
visual creature on me. What’s there to see when the 
damned things come down?” 

“The glow.” 

“Eh?” 

“A fiery red ball. Falling like a meteor.” 

“Rot.” 

“Gwenhidwy saw one the other night. over Deptford.” 

“What I want,” Pointsman leaning now into the central 
radiance of the lamp, his white face more vulnerable than 
his voice, whispering across the burning spire of a hypo- 
dermic set upright on the desk, “what I really need, is not 
a dog, not an octopus, but one of your Foxes. Damn 
it. One, little, Fox!” i 


Beyond the Zero 61 


Oo 


Something’s stalking through the city of Smoke—gathering 
up slender girls, fair and smooth as dolls, by the handful. 
' Their piteous cries... their dollful and piteous cries... 
_ the face of one is suddenly very close, and down! over the 
- staring eyes come cream lids with ‘stiff lashes, slamming 
loudly shut, the long reverberating of lead counterweights 
_ tumble inside her head as Jessica’s own lids now come 
flying open. She surfaces in time to hear the last echoes 
_ blowing away on the heels of the blast, austere and keen, 
_ a winter sound.... Roger wakes up briefly too, mutters 
-. something like “Fucking madness,” and nods back to sleep. 

She reaches out, blind little hand grazing the ticking 

_ clock, the worn-plush ‘stomach of her panda Michael, an 
ik - empty milk bottle holding scarlet blossoms from a spurge 
ig in a garden a mile down the road: reaches to where her 
cigarettes ought to be but aren’t. Halfway out now from 
__ under the covers, she hangs, between the two worlds, a 
' white, athletic tension in this cold room. Oh, well . . she 

leaves him in their warm burrow, moves shivering vahvehs 
yuh in grainy darkness over winter-tight floorboards, slick 

i as ice to her bare soles. 
__ Her cigarettes are on the parlor floor, left among pillows 
_ in front of the fire. Roger’s clothing is scattered all about. 
_ Puffing on a cigarette, squinting with one eye for the 
_ smoke, she tidies up, folding his trousers, hanging up his 
| shirt. Then wanders to the window, lifts the blackout cur- 
pean, tries to see out through frost gathering on the panes, 
out into the snow tracked over by foxes, rabbits, long-lost 
ogs, and winter birds but no humans. Empty canals of 
thread away into trees and town whose name they 
still don’t know. She cups the cigarettes in her palm, leery 
of showing a light though blackout was lifted weeks and 
eeks ago, already part of another time and world. Late 
motors rush north and south in the night, and air- 
es fill the sky then drain away east to some kind of 


; "Could they have settled for hotels, AR-E forms, being 


q frisked for cameras and binoculars? This house, town, 


62 Gravity’s RAINBOW | 


crossed arcs of Roger and Jessica are so vulnerable, to 
German weapons and to British bylaws... it doesn’t feel 
like danger here, but she does wish there were others 
about, and that it could really be a village, her village. 
The searchlights could stay, to light the night, and bar- 
rage balloons to populate fat and friendly the daybreak— 
everything, even the explosions in the distances might 
stay as long as they were to no purpose... as long as no 
one had to die... couldn’t it be that way? only excite- 
ment, sound and light, a storm approaching in the sum- 
mer (to live in a world where that would be the day’s 
excitement .,.), only kind thunder? 

Jessica has floated out of herself, up to watch herself 
watching the night, to hover in widelegged, shoulder- 
padded white, satin-polished on her nightward surfaces. 
Until something falls here, close enough to matter, they do 
have their safety: their thickets of silverblue stalks reach- 
ing after dark to touch or sweep clouds, the green-brown 
masses in uniform, at the ends of afternoons, stone, eyes 
on the distances, bound in convoy for fronts, for high 
destinies that have, strangely, so little to do with the two 
of them here... don’t you know there’s a war on, moron? 
yes but—here’s Jessica in her sister's hand-me-down 
pajamas, and Roger asleep in nothing at all; but where is 
the war? 

Until it touch them. Until something falls, A doodle 
will give time to get to safety, a rocket will hit before 
they can hear it coming. Biblical, maybe, spooky as an 
old northern fairy tale, but not The War, not the great 
struggle of good and evil the wireless reports everyday. 
And no reason not just to, well, to keep on.... 

Roger has tried to explain to her the V-bomb statistics: 
the difference between distribution, in angel’s-eye view, 
over the map of England, and their own chances, as seen 
from down here. She’s almost got it: nearly understands 
his Poisson equation, yet can’t quite put the two together— 
put her own enforced calm day-to-day alongside the pure 
numbers, and keep them both in sight. Pieces keep slip- 
ping in and out. . ; 

“Why is your equation only for angels, Roger? Why 
can’t we do something, down here? Couldn’t there be an 
equation for us too, something to help us find a safer 
place?” 


Beyond the Zero 63 


- “Why am I surrounded,” his usual understanding self 
today, “by statistical illiterates? There’s no way, love, not 
_as long as the mean density of strikes is constant. Points- 
man doesn’t even understand that.” 

The rockets are distributing about London just as 

Poisson’s equation in the textbooks predicts. As the data 
keep coming in, Roger looks more and more like a prophet. 
Psi Section people stare after him in the hallways. It’s not 
precognition, he wants to make an announcement in the 
cafeteria or something...have I ever pretended to be 

anything I’m not? all I’m doing is plugging numbers into 
/a well-known equation, you can look it up in the book 
and do it yourself. ... 
His little bureau is dominated now by a glimmering map, 
a window into another landscape than winter Sussex, writ- 
_ten names and spidering streets, an ink ghost of London, 
'tuled off into 576 squares, a quarter square kilometer 
each. Rocket strikes are represented by red circles. The 
' Poisson equation will tell, for a number of total hits arbi- 
_ trarily chosen, how many squares will get none, how many 
_ one, two, three, and so on. 
_ An Erlenmeyer flask bubbles on the ring. Blue light 
goes rattling, reknotting through the seedflow inside the 
glass. Ancient tatty textbooks and mathematical papers lie 
Scattered about on desk and floor. Somewhere a snapshot 
of Jessica peeks from beneath Roger’s old Whittaker and 
_ Watson. The graying Pavlovian, on route with his tautened 
gait, thin as a needle, in the mornings to his lab, where 
dogs wait with cheeks laid open, winter-silver drops well- 
ing from each neat raw fistula to fill the wax cup or gradu- 
ated tube, pauses by Mexico’s open door. The air beyond 
_is blue from cigarettes smoked and as fag-ends later in the 
eezing black moming shifts resmoked, a stale and loath- 
me atmosphere. But he must go in, must face the habit- 
| morning cup.. 

-_ Both know how strange their liaison must look. If ever 
e Antipointsman existed, Roger Mexico is the man. Not 
0 much, the doctor admits, for the psychical research. 
ie young statistician is devoted to number and to 
od, not table-rapping or wishful thinking. But in the 
domain of zero to one, not-something to something, 
Yointsman can only possess the zero and the one. He 


ee 
64 Graviry’s Ramsow 
master L P. Pavlow before him, he imagines the cortex of 


| 
if 


abilities. A chance of 0.37 that, by the time he his 
count, 2 given square on his map will have only 
one hit, 0.17 that it will suffer two.... 

“Cant you... tell,” Poimtsman offering Mexico one of 
his Kyprinos Orients, which he guards in secret fag fobs 


squares exactly as it should... growing to its predicted 
“But squares that have already had several hits, I 
“Tm sorry. That’s the Monte Carlo Fallacy. No matter 
how many have fallen inside a particular square, the 


g 
: 
EB 
E | 
ay 
i ckee 


ret 
tae] 
rE 
F 
ah 


ee 
Hise 
fat 
ne 
Ha 
Hi 


4 Beyond the Zero y 65 


tens the idea of cause and effect itself. What if 

-Mexico’s whole generation have turned out like this? Will 
Postwar be nothing but “events,” newly created one 

Smoment to the next? No links? Is it the end of history? 

_ “The Romans,” Roger and the Reverend Dr. Paul de la 
Nuit were drunk together one night, or the vicar was, 

“the ancient Roman priests laid a sieve in the road, and 
then waited to see which stalks of grass would come up 
through the holes.” 

: Roger saw the connection immediately. “I wonder,” 
reaching for pocket after pocket, why are there never any 
_damned—ah here, “if it would follow a Poisson... let’s 
see...” 

_ “Mexico.” Leaning forward, definitely hostile. “They 
used the stalks that grew through the holes to cure the 
sick. The sieve was a very sacred item to them. What will 

u do with the sieve you've laid over London? How will 
you use the things that grow in your network of death?” 

“TI don’t follow you.” It’s just an equation. . 

Roger really wants other people to know what he’s talk- 
ing about. Jessica understands that. When they don’t, his 
face often grows chalky and clouded, as behind the 

way glass of a railway carriage window as vaguely 

silvered barriers come down, spaces slide in to separate 
that much more, thinning further his loneliness. She 
their very first day, he leaning across to open the 

. ee ee Se ew 

his face, between his red nail-bitten 


To Dnkschchh givestina Ker Fay Wray sae eyes round 
aS Car be, red mouth about to open in a scream, till he 
eee net “Oli ston.” 

i . .” but what does she want to say? That he 
mus always be lovable, in need of her and never, as now, 
he hovering satistical cherub who’s never quite been to 
Eilat speaks ss if he's one of the most fallen. . 
“Cheap nihilism” $Captain Prontice’s name for that. It 
us one day by the frozen pond near “The White Visita- 


66 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


tion,” Roger off sucking icicles, lying flat and waving his 
arms to make angels in the snow, larking. 

“Do you mean that he hasn’t paid... »” looking up, up, 
Pirate’s wind-burned face seeming to ‘end in the sky, her 
own hair finally in the way of his gray, reserved eyes. He 
was Roger’s friend, he wasn’t playing or undermining, 
didn’t know the first thing, she guessed, about such danc- 
ing-shoe wars—and anyway didn’t have to, because she 
was already, terrible flirt... well, nothing serious, but 
those eyes she could never quite see into were so swoony, 
so utterly terrif, really. . 

“The more V-2s over there waiting to be fired over 
here,” Captain Prentice said, “obviously, the better his 
chances of catching one. Of course you can’t say he’s not 
paying a minimum dues. But aren’t we all.” 

“Well,” Roger nodding when she told him later, eyes 
out of focus, considering this, “it’s the damned Calvinist 
insanity again. Payment. Why must they always put it in 
terms of exchange? What’s Prentice want, another kind of 
Beveridge Proposal or something? Assign everyone a 
Bitterness Quotient! lovely—up before the Evaluation 
Board, so many points earned for being Jewish, in a con- 
centration camp, missing limbs or vital organs, losing a 
wife, a lover, a close friend—" 

“I knew you'd be angry,” she murmured. | 

“I'm not angry. No. He’s right. It is cheap. All right, but. 
what does he want then—” stalking now this stuffed, dim 
little parlor, hung about with rigid portraits of favorite 
gun dogs at point in fields that never existed save in cer-| 
tain fantasies about death, leas more golden as their lin- 
seed oil ages, even more autumnal, necropolitical, than pre- 
war hopes—for an end. to all change, for a long static! 
afternoon and the grouse forever in blurred takeoff, the 
sights taking their lead aslant purple hills to pallid sky, | 
the good dog alerted by the eternal scent, the explosion 
over his head always just about to come—these hopes sc 
patently, defenselessly there that Roger even at his most 
cheaply nihilistic couldn’t quite bring himself to take the 
pictures down, turn them to the w: gullg “what do you! 
all expect from me, working day in out among raving 
lunatics,” Jessica sighing oh gosh, ae g her pretty leg: 
up into the chair, “they believe in survival after death 


_ Beyond the Zero . 67 


communication mind-to- mind, prophesying, clairvoyance, 
i teleportation—they believe, Jess! and—and—” something 
_ is blocking his speech. She forgets her annoyance, comes 
_ up out of the fat paisley chair to hold him, and how does 
- she know, warm-skirted thighs and mons pushing close to 
“heat and rouse his cock, losing the last of her lipstick 
across his shirt, muscles, touches, skins confused, high, 
_ blooded—know so exactly what Roger meant to say? 

__ Mind-to-mind, tonight up late at the window while he 
a sleeps, lighting another precious cigarette from the coal 
_ of the last, filling. with a need to cry because she can see 
4 so plainly her limits, knows she can never protect him as 
% much as she must—from what may come out of the sky, 
from what he couldn’t confess that day (creaking snow 
~ lanes, arcades of the ice-bearded and bowing trees... the 
- wind shook down crystals of snow: purple and orange 
= blooming on her long lashes), and from Mr. 
: 


eee 


Pointsman, and. from Pointsman’s...his...a bleakness 
4 whenever she meets him. Scientist-neutrality. Hands that— 
she shivers. There are chances now for enemy shapes out 
_ of the snow and stillness, She drops the blackout curtain. 
_ Hands that could as well torture people as dogs and never 
- feel their pain, 
_ A’ skulk of foxes, a cowardice of curs are tonight’s 
traffic whispering in the yards and lanes, A motorcycle out 
on the trunk road, snarling cocky as a fighter plane, by- 
passes the village, heading up to London, The great bal- 
loons drift in the sky, pearl-grown, and the air is so still 
that this morning’s brief snow still clings to the. steel 
cables, white goes twisting peppermint-stick down thou- 
‘of feet of night. And the people who might have 
asleep in the empty houses here, people blown away, 
Bait a forever . .. are they yes of cities that 


so vulnerable on ae bare hillside, so bleached by 

the Star’s awful radiance? or of songs so funny, so ny 
ee that they can’t be remembered.on waking.. 

ims of peacetime. . 

What was it like? Before the war?” She knows she was 

then, a child, but it’s not what she means. Wireless, 

Frank Bridge Variations a hairbrush for the 


68 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


tangled brain over the BBC Home Service, bottle of Mon- 
trachet, a gift from Pirate, cooling at the kitchen window. 

“Well, now,” in his cracked old curmudgeon’s voice, 
palsied hand reaching out to squeeze her breast in the 
nastiest way he knows, “girly, it depends which war you 
mean,” and here it comes, ugh, ugh, drool welling at the 
corner of his lower lip and over and down in a silver 
string, he’s so clever, he’s practiced all these disgusting 
little— . 

“Don’t be ridic, I’m serious, Roger. I don’t remember.” 
Watches dimples come up either side of his mouth as he 
considers this, smiling at her in an odd way. I¢ll be like 
this when I’m thirty ... flash of several children, a garden, 
a window, voices Mummy, what’s...cucumbers and 
brown onions on a chopping board, wild carrot blossoms 
sprinkling with brilliant yellow a reach of deep, very 
green lawn and his voice— 

“All I remember is that it was silly. Just overwhelm- 
ingly silly. Nothing happened. Oh, Edward VIII abdicated. 
He fell in love with—” 

“I know that, I can read magazines. But what was it 
like?” 

“Just... just damned silly, that’s all, Worrying about 
things that don’t—Jess, can’t you really remember?” 

Games, pinafores, girl friends, a black alley kitten with 
white little feet, holidays all the family by the sea, brine, 
ee fish, donkey rides, peach taffeta, a boy named 
Robin... 

“Nothing that’s really gone, that I can’t ever find again.” 

“Oh. Whereas my memories—” 

“Yes?” They both smile. 

“One took lots of aspirin. One was drinking or drunk 
much of the time. One was concerned about getting one’s 
lounge suits to fit properly. One despised the upper classes 
but tried desperately to behave like them. . 

“And one cried wee, wee, wee, all the ars Jessica 
breaking down in a giggle as he reaches for the spot along 
her sweatered flank he knows she can’t bear to be tickled : 
in. She hunches, squirming, out of the way as he 
past, bouncing off the back of the sofa but making a nice 
recovery, and by now she’s ticklish all over, he can ae 
an ankle, elbow— 


"Beyond the Zero 69 


But a aoe has suddenly struck. A terrific blast quite 
close beyond the village: the entire fabric of the air, the 
‘time, is changed—the casement window blown inward, 
_ rebounding with a wood squeak to slam again as all the 
house still shudders. 

Their hearts pound, Eardrums brushed taut by the 
4 overpressure ring in pain. The invisible train rushes away 
3 close over the rooftop. . 
They sit still as the painted dogs now, silent, oddly un- 
_ able to touch. Death has come in the pantry door: stands 
_ watching them, iron and patient, with a look that says 
_ try to tickle me. 


; o 
Bai) 
Bris 3. TDY Abreaction Ward 
ies St. Veronica’s Hospital 
“yl Bonechapel Gate, E1 
bey London, England 
Winter, 1944 


' 
. 
_. The Kenosha Kid 
_ General Delivery 
es Kenosha, Wisconsin, U.S.A. 
ie Deer Sir; 
e Did I ever bother you, ever, for anything, in your life? 
Peisres? Yours truly, 
Lt. Rinse ‘slothtop 


General Delivery. 
Kenosha, Wisc., U.S.A. 
few days later 

one Slothrop, Esq. : 

Y Abreaction Ward 

Veronica’s Hospital 

Bor aca Gate, oe 
Mr. Slothrop: 

_ The Kenosha Kid 
é 


70 Gravity’s RAInNBow 


(2) Smartass youth: Aw, I did all them old-fashioned 
dances, I did the “Charleston,” a-and the “Big Apple,” 
too! 

Old veteran hoofer: Bet you never did the “Kenosha,” 
kid! 


(2.1) S.Y.: Shucks, I did all them dances, I did the 
“Castle Walk,” and I did the “Lindy,” tool 
O.V.H.: Bet you never did the “Kenosha Kid.” 


(3) Minor employee: Well, he has been avoiding me, 
and I thought it might be because of the Slothrop Affair. 
If he somehow held me responsible— 

Superior (haughtily): You! never did the Kenosha Kid 
think for one instant that you... 


(3.1) Superior (incredulously): YouP Never! Did the 
Kenosha Kid think for one instant that you...? 


(4) And at the end of the mighty day in which he gave 
us in fiery letters across the sky all the words we’d ever 
need, words we today enjoy, and fill our dictionaries with, | 
the meek voice of little Tyrone Slothrop, celebrated ever | 
after in tradition and song, ventured to filter upward to 
the Kid’s attention: “You never did ‘the,’ Kenosha Kid!” 
These changes on the text “You never did the Kenosha 
Kid!” are occupying Slothrop’s awareness as the doctor — 
leans in out of the white overhead to wake him and begin — 
the session. The needle slips without pain into the vein 
just outboard of the hollow in the crook of his elbow: 10% _ 
Sodium Amytal, one cc at a time, as needed. 


(5) Maybe you did fool the Philadelphia, rag the | 
Rochester, josh the Joliet. But you néver did the Kenosha | 
kid. 


(6) (The day of the Ascent and sacrifice, A nation-wide | 
observance. Fats searing, blood dripping and burning to a | : 
salty brown...) You did the Charlottesville shoat, check, 
the Forest Hills foal, check. (Fading now...) The | 
Laredo lamb. Check. Oh-oh. Wait. What's this, Slothrop? 


You never did the Kenosha kid. Snap to, Slothrop. 


' Beyond the Zero 71 


Got a hardon in my fist, 
Don’t be pissed, 

~ Re-enlist— 

l Snap—to, Slothrop] 


Jackson, I don’t give a fuck, 
Just give me my “ruptured duck!” 
Snap—to, Slothrop! 


~ No one here can love or comprehend me, 
They just look for someplace else to send ...M@.00 


Tap my head and mike my brain, 
Stick that needle in my vein, 
Slothrop, snap tol 


_ PISCES: We want to talk some more about Boston 
| today, Slothrop. You recall that we were talking last time 
bout the Negroes, in Roxbury. Now we know it’s not all 
that comfortable for you, but do try, won't you. Now— 
_ where are you, Slothrop? Can you see anything? 
_ Slothrop: Well no, not see exactly... 
_ Roaring in by elevated subway, only in Boston, steel 
= and a carbon shroud. over the ancient bricks— 


Ben os 


ii 


a Rhy-thm’s got me, 
a Oh baby dat swing, swing, swing] 
Ba Yeah de rhythm got me 

S Just a-thinkin’ that whole-wide-world-can-sing, 

Well I never ever heard-it, sound-so-sweet, 

% Even down around the comer-on, Ba-sin Street, 
As now dat de rhythm’s got me, chillun let’s 
Swing, swing, swing, 

Come on... chillun, let’s ... swing! 


lack Fatiss: white tablecloth, gleaming very sharp 

es lined up by the saucers... tobacco and ‘ “gage” 

ke richly blended, eye-reddening and tart as wine, 

zah gwine smoke a little ob dis hyah sheeit gib de 
es in mah brain a process! straighten ’em all raht 

out, sho nufl 

\ 'BISCES: That was “sho nuf,” Slothrop? 

“White c Come on you guys... don’t make it too... 
Vv college boys, hollering requests to the “combo” up 


es Gravity’s RAINBOW 


on the stand. Eastern prep-school voices, pronouncing 
asshole with a certain sphinctering of the lips so it comes 
out ehisshehwle...they reel, they roister. Aspidistras, 
giant philodendrons, green broad leaves and jungle palms 
go hanging into the dimness...two bartenders, a very. 
fair West Indian, slight, with a mustache, and his running- 
mate black/as a hand in an evening glove, are moving 
endlessly in front of the deep, the oceanic mirror that 
swallows most of the room into metal shadows... the 
hundred bottles hold their light only briefly before it 
flows away into the mirror... even when someone bends 
to light a cigarette, the flame reflects back in there only 
as dark, sunset orange. Slothrop can’t even see his own 
white face. A woman turns to look at him from a table. 
Her eyes tell him, in the instant, what he is. The mouth 
harp in his pocket reverts to brass inertia. A weight. A 
jive accessory. But he packs it everywhere he goes. 
Upstairs in the men’s room at the Roseland Ballroom he 
swoons kneeling over a toilet bowl, vomiting beer, ham- 
burgers, homefries, chef’s salad with French dressing, half 
a bottle of Moxie, after-dinner mints, a Clark bar, a pound 
of salted peanuts, and the cherry from some Radcliffe 
girl’s old-fashioned. With no warming, as tears stream out 
his eyes, PLOP goes the harp into the, aagghh, the loath- 
some toilet! Immediate little bubbles slide up its bright 
flanks, up brown wood surfaces, some varnished some lip- 
worn, these fine silver seeds tripping loose along the harp’s 
descent toward stone-white cervix and into lower night.... 
Someday the U.S. Army will provide him with shirts whose 
pockets he can button. But in these prewar days he can 
rely only on the starch in his snow-white Arrow to hold 
the pocket stuck together enough to keep objects from... 
But no, no, fool, the harp has fallen, remember? the low 
reeds singing an instant on striking porcelain (it’s raining 
against a window somewhere, and outside on top of a 
sheet-metal vent on the roof: cold Boston rain) then 
quenched in the water streaked with the last bile-brown 
coils of his vomit. There’s no calling it back. Either he 
lets the harp go, his silver chances of song, or he has to: 
follow. ah) 
Follow?. Red, the Negro shoeshine boy, waits by his 
dusty leather seat. The Negroes all over wasted Roxbury 


Re Beyond the Zero 73 


wait. Follow? “Cherokee” comes wailing up from the 
dance floor below, over the hi-hat, the string bass, the 
» thousand sets of feet where moving rose lights suggest not 
_pale Harvard boys and their dates, but a lotta dolled-up 
_redskins. The song playing is one more lie about white 
crimes. But more musicians have floundered in the chan- 
‘nel to “Cherokee” than have got through from end to end. 
All those long, long notes... what’re they up to, all that 
time to do something inside of? is it an Indian spirit plot? - 
- Down in New York, drive fast maybe get there for the 
_ last set-—on 7th Ave., between 139th and 140th, tonight, 
_“Yardbird” Parker is finding out how he can use the notes 
at the higher ends of these very chords to break up the 
_ melody into have mercy what is it a fucking machine gun 
_ or something man he must be out of his mind 32nd notes 
_demisemiquavers say it very (demisemiquaver) fast in a 
_ Munchkin voice if you can dig that coming out of Dan 
_ Wall’s Chili House and down the street—shit, out in all 
_ kinds of streets (his trip, by ’39, well begun: down inside 
‘his most affirmative solos honks already the idle, amused 
_dum-de-dumming of old Mister fucking Death he self) 
_ out over the airwaves, into the society gigs, someday as 
_far as what seeps out hidden speakers in the city eleva- 
_ tors and in all the markets, his bird’s singing, to gainsay 
_ the Man’s lullabies, to subvert the groggy wash of the end- 
_lessly, gutlessly over-dubbed strings. . . . So that prophecy, 
_ even up here on rainy Massachusetts Avenue, is beginning 
‘these days to work itself out in “Cherokee,” the saxes 
' downstairs getting now into some, oh really weird shit.... 
If Slothrop follows that harp down the toilet it’ll have 
_ to be headfirst, which is not so good, cause it leaves his 
ass up in the air helpless, and with Negroes around that’s . 
ust what a fella doesn’t want, his face down in some fetid 
own darkness and brown fingers, strong and sure, all 
‘once undoing his belt, unbuttoning his fly, strong hands 
ding his legs apart—and he feels the cold Lysol air on 
uis thighs as down come the boxer shorts too, now, with 
_the colorful bass lures and trout flies on them. He struggles 
to work himself farther into the toilet hole as dimly, up 
through the smelly water, comes the sound of a whole 
k gang of awful Negroes come yelling happily into the 
ite men’s room, converging on poor wriggling Slothrop, 


oe 

ie ef 
' i 
Be oe 


74 Gravity's RaAInBow 


jiving around the way they do singing, “Slip the talcum to 
me, Malcolm!” And the voice that replies is who but that 
Red, shoeshine boy who’s slicked up Slothrop’s black pat- 
ents a dozen times down on his knees jes poppin’ dat rag 
to beat the band...now Red the very tall, skinny, ex- 
travagantly conked redhead Negro shoeshine boy who’s 
just been “Red” to all the Harvard fellas—“Say Red, any 
of those Sheiks in the drawer?” “How “bout another luck- 
changin’ phone number there, Red?”—this Negro whose 
true name now halfway down the toilet comes at last to 
Slothrop’s hearing—as a thick finger with a gob of very 
slippery jelly or cream comes sliding down the crack now 
toward his asshole, chevroning the hairs along like topo 
lines up a river valley—the true name is Malcalm, and all 
the black cocks know him, Malcolm, have known him all 
along—Red Malcolm the Unthinkable Nihilist sez, “Good 
golly he sure is all asshole ain’t he?” Jeepers Slothrop, 
what a position for you to be in! Even though he has suc- 
ceeded in getting far enough down now so that only his 
legs protrude and his buttocks heave and wallow just under 
the level of the water like pallid domes of ice. Water 
splashes, cold as the rain outside, up the walls of the 
white bowl. “Grab him ’fo’ he gits away!” “Yowzahl” 
Distant hands clutch after his calves and ankles, snap his 
garters and tug at the argyle sox Mom knitted for him to 
go to Harvard in, but these insulate so well, or he has 
progressed so far down the toilet by now, that he can 
hardly feel the hands at all.... 

Then he has shaken them off, left the last Negro touch 
back up there and is free, slick as a fish, with his virgin 
asshole preserved. Now some folks might say whew, thank 
God for that, and others moaning a little, aw shucks, but 
Slothrop doesn’t say much of anything cause he didn’t feel 
much of anything. A-and there’s still no sign of his lost 
harp. The light down here is dark gray and rather faint. 
For some time has been aware of shit, elaborately crusted 
along the sides of this ceramic (or by now, iron) 
he’s in: shit nothing can flush away, mixed with hardwater 
minerals into a deliberate brown barnaclin acling of his route, 
patterns thick with meaning, Burm’-Shave signs of the 
toilet world, icky and sticky, cryptic nd glyptic, these 
shapes loom and pass smoothly as he continues on down 


) ‘ sa Beyond the Zero~ 75 


the long cloudy waste line, the sounds of “Cherokee” still 
pulsing very dimly above, playing him to the sea. He finds 
_ he can identify certain traces of shit as belonging definitely 
to this or that Harvard fellow of his acquaintances. Some 
_ of it too of course must be Negro shit, but that all looks 
alike. Hey, here’s that “Gobbler” Biddle, must’ve been the 
_ night we all ate chop suey at Fu’s Folly in Cambridge 
cause there’s bean sprouts around here someplace and even 
_ a hint of that wild plum sauce... say, certain senses then 
do seem to grow sharper... wow... Fu’s Folly, weepers, 
, that was months ago. A-and here’s Dumpster Villard, he 
was constipated that night, wasn’t he—it’s black shit mean 
‘as resin that will someday clarify forever to dark amber. 
In its blunt, reluctant touches along the wall (which speak 
the reverse of its own cohesion) he can, uncannily shit- 
sensitized now, read old agonies inside poor Dumpster, 
_ who'd tried suicide last semester: the differential equations 
_ that would not weave for him into any elegance, the 
mother with the low-slung hat and silk knees leaning 
across Slothrop’s table in Sidney’s Great Yellow Grille to 
finish for him his bottle of Canadian ale, the Radcliffe 
_ girls who evaded him, the black professionals Malcolm 
_ touted him on to who dealt him erotic cruelty by the 
_ dollar, up to as much as he could take. Or if Mother's 
_ check was late, only afford. Gone away upstream, bas- 
relief Dumpster lost in the gray light as now Slothrop is 
- going past the sign of Will Stonybloke, of J. Peter Pitt, of 
Jack Kennedy, the ambassador’s son—say, where the heck 
_ is that Jack tonight, anyway? If anybody could’ve saved 
, that harp, betcha Jack could. Slothrop admires him from 
- a distance—he’s athletic, and kind, and one of the most 
well-liked fellows in Slothrop’ s class. Sure is daffy about 
\ that history, though. Jack... might Jack have kept it from 
§ g, violated gravity somehow? Here, in this passage 
to the Atlantic, odors of salt, weed, decay washing to him 
"faintly like the sound of breakers, yes it seems Jack might 
' have. For the sake of tunes to be played, millions of pos- 
_ sible blues lines, notes to be bent from the official frequen- 
_ cies, bends Slothrop hasn’t really the breath to do... not 
ret but someday... well at least if (when... ) he finds 
ee instrument it'll ‘lie well soaked in, a lot easier to play. 
¥ A hopeful thought to carry with you down the toilet. 


Fo 


= 


76 Gravity's Rainsow 


Down the toilet, lookit me, 
What a silly thing ta dol 
Hope nobody takes a pee, 
Yippy dippy dippy doo... 


At which precise point there comes this godawful surge 
from up the line, noise growing like a tidal wave, a jam- 
packed wavefront of shit, vomit, toilet paper and dingle- 
berries in mind-boggling mosaic, rushing down on panicky 
Slothrop like an MTA subway train on its own hapless 
victim. Nowhere to run. Paralyzed, he stares back over 
his shoulder. A looming wall stringing long tendrils of 
shitpaper behind, the shockwave is on him—GAAHHHI 
he tries a feeble frog kick at the very last moment but 
already the cylinder of waste has wiped him out, dark as 
cold beef gelatin along his upper backbone, the paper 
snapping up, wrapping across his lips, his nostrils, every- 
thing gone and shit-stinking now as he has to keep batting 
micro-turds out of his eyelashes, it’s worse than being 
torpedoed by Japs! the brown liquid tearing along, carry- 
ing him helpless . . . seems he’s been tumbling ass over tea- 
kettle—though there’s no way to tell in this murky shit- 
storm, no visual references... from time to time he will 
brush against shrubbery, or perhaps small feathery trees. 
It occurs to him he hasn’t felt the touch of a hard wall 
ie he started to tumble, if that indeed is what he’s 

oing. | 

At some point the brown dusk around him has begun 
to lighten. Like the dawn. Bit by bit his vertigo leaves’ 
him. The last wisps of shitpaper, halfway back to slurry, 
go...sad, dissolving, away. An eerie light grows on him, | 
a watery and marbled light he hopes won’t last for long 
because of what it seems to promise to show. But “con- 
tacts” are living in these waste regions. People he knows. 
Inside shells of old, what seem to be fine-packed masonry | 
ruins—weathered cell after cell, many of them roofless. | 
Wood fires burn in black fireplaces, water simmers in rusty 
institutional-size lima-bean cans, and the steam goes up 
the leaky chimneys. And they sit about the worn flag- 
stones, transacting some... he can’t place it exactly... 
something vaguely religious.... Bedrooms are fully fur- 
nished, with lights that turn and glow, velvet hung from 
walls and ceiling. Down to the last ignored blue bead’ 


f Beyond the Zero 77 


_ clogged with dust under the Capehart, the last dried spider 
and complex ruffling of the carpet’s nap, the intricacy of 
these dwellings amazes him. It is a place of sheltering 
from disaster. Not necessarily the flushings of the Toilet— 
| these occur here only as a sort of inferred disturbance, 
behind this ancient sky, in its corroded evenness of tone— 
_ but something else has been terribly at this country, some- 
thing poor soggy Slothrop cannot see or hear...as if 
| there is a Pearl Harbor every morning, smashing invisibly 
from the sky.... He has toilet paper in his hair and a 
| fuzzy thick dingleberry lodged up inside his right nostril. 
Ugh, ugh. Decline and fall works silently on this land- 
scape. No sun, no moon, only a long smooth sinewaving 
of the light. It is a Negro dingleberry, he can tell—stub- 
born as a wintertime booger as he probes for it. His finger- 
‘nails draw blood. He stands outside all the communal 
ae and spaces, outside in his own high-desert morning, 
_a reddish-brown hawk, two, hanging up on an air current 
“to watch the horizon. It’s cold. The wind blows. He can 
‘feel only his isolation. They want him inside there but he 
can’t join them. Something prevents him: once inside, it 
would be like taking some kind of blood oath. They would 
“never release him. There are no guarantees he might not 
| be asked to do something... something so... 
Now every loose stone, every piece of tinfoil, billet of 
wood, scrap of kindling or cloth is moving up and down: 
rising ten feet then dropping again to hit the pavement 
with a sharp clap, The light is thick and water-green. All 
down the streets, debris rises and falls in unison, as if at 
| the mercy of some deep, regular wave. It’s difficult to see 
any distance through the vertical dance. The drumming 
on the pavement goes for eleven beats, skips a twelfth, 
the cycle over... it is the rhythm of some tradi- 
‘tional American tune.... The streets are all empty of 
people. It’s either dawn or twilight. Parts of the debris that 
ci metal shine with a hard, nearly blue persistence. 


1% ; ’ Now don’t you remember Red Malcolm up a 
* n> That kid with the Red Devil Lye in his hair . 


| iiiters now is Crutchfield or Crouchfield, the westward- 
| a Not “archetypical” westwardman, but the only. 
nderstand, there was only one. There was only one 


78 Graviry’s Ramnsow 


Indian who ever fought him, Only one fight, one victory, 
one loss. And only one president, and one assassin, and 
one election, True. One of each of everything. You had 
thought of solipsism, and imagined the structure to be 
populated—on your level—by only, terribly, one. No 
count on any other levels, But it proves to be not quite 
that lonely. Sparse, yes, but a good deal better than soli- 
tary. One of each of everything’s not so bad. Half an 
Ark’s better than none. This Crutchfield here is browned 
by sun, wind and dirt—against the deep brown slats of 
the barn or stable wall he is wood of a different grain and 
finish. He is good-humored, solid-set against the purple 
mountainslope, and looking half into the sun. His shadow 
is carried strained coarsely back through the network of 
wood inside the stable—beams, lodgepoles, -stall uprights, 
trough-trestlework, rafters, wood ceiling-slats the sun 
comes through: blinding empyrean even at this failing 
hour of the day. There is somebody playing a mouth harp 
behind an outbuilding—some musical glutton, mouth-suck- 
ing giant five-note chords behind the tune of 


Rep Raver VALLEY 


Down this toilet they say you are flushin’— 
Won’tchew light up and set fer a spell? 

Cause the toilet it ain’t going nowhar, 

And the shit hereabouts shore is swell. 


Oh, it’s the Red River all right, if you don’t believe it 
just ask that “Red,” wherever he may be (tell you what 
Red means, FDR’s little asshole buddies, they want to 
take it all away, women all have hair on their legs, give 
it all to them or they'll blow it up round black iron in the 
middle of the night bleeding over Polacks in gray caps 
okies niggers yeh niggers especially . . .) 

Well, back here, Crutchfield’s little pard has just come 
out of the barn. His little pard of the moment, anyway. 
Crutchfield has left a string of broken-hearted little pards 
across this vast alkali plain. One little feeb in South 
Dakota, i 
One little hustler in San Berdoo, | 
One little chink run away from the railroad 


a 


Beyond the Zero 79 


With his ass just as yellow as Fu Manchu! 

One with the clap and one with a goiter, 

One with the terminal lepro-see, 

Cripple on the right foot, cripple on the left foot, 
Crippled up both feet ’n’ that makes three! 

Well one little fairy, even one bull dyke, 

One little nigger, one little kike, 

One Red Indian with one buffalo, 

And a buffalo hunter from New Mexico... 


And on, and on, one of each of everything, he’s the White 
Coeksman of the terre mauwais, this Crouchfield, doing it 
with both sexes and all animals except for rattlesnakes 
(properly speaking, “rattlesnake,” since there’s only one), 
but lately he’s been havin’ these fantasies about that 
rattlesnake, too! Fangs just tickling the foreskin... the 
pale mouth open wide, and the horrible joy in the crescent 
eyes.... His little pard of the moment is Whappo, a 
Norwegian mulatto lad, who has a fetish for horsy para- 
phernalia, likes to be quirt-whipped inside the sweat-and- 
leather tackrooms of their wandering, which is three 
weeks old today, pretty long time for a little pard to’ve 
lasted. Whappo is wearing chaps of imported gazelle hide 
_that Crutchfield bought for him in Eagle Pass from a faro 
dealer with a laudanum habit who was crossing the great 
Rio forever, in the blank fumace of the wild Mexico. 
Whappo also sports a bandanna of the regulation magenta 
and green (Crutchfield is supposed to have a closetful of 
‘these silken scarves back home at “Rancho Peligroso” and 
“never rides out into the rock-country and riverbed trails 
‘without a dozen or two stashed in his saddlebags. This 
must mean that the one-of-each rule applies only to forms 
of life, such as little pards, and not to objects, such as 
bandannas). And Whappo tops off with a high shiny 
‘Opera hat of Japanese silk. Whappo is quite the dandy 
‘this afternoon in fact, as he comes sauntering out from 
the bam. 
_ “Ah, Crutchfield,” flipping a hand, “how nice of you to 
show up.” 
_ “You knew Id show up, you little rascal,” shit that 
_Whappo is such a caution. Always baiting his master in 
‘hopes of getting a leather-keen stripe or two across those 
dusky Afro-Scandinavian buttocks, which combine the 


t Bs 


80 Gravity's Ramnsow 


callipygian rondure observed among the races of the Dark 
Continent with the taut and noble musculature of sturdy 
Olaf, our blond Northern cousin. But this time Crutchfield 
only turns back to watching the distant mountains. 
Whappo sulks. His top hat reflects the coming holocaust. 
What the white man does not have to utter, however 
casually, is anything like “Toro Rojo’s gonna be riding in 
tonight.” Both pardners know about that. The wind, bring- 
ing them down that raw Injun smell, ought to be enough 
for anybody. Oh God it’s gonna be a shootout and bloody 
as hell, The wind will be blowing so hard blood will glaze 
on the north sides of the trees. The redskin'll have a dog 
with him, the only Indian dog in these whole ashen 
plains—the cur will mix it up with little Whappo and end 
hung on the meathook of an open meat stall in the dirt 
plaza back in Los Madres, eyes wide open, mangy coat 
still intact, black fleas hopping against the sunlit mortar 
and stone of the church wall across the square, blood 
darkened and crusting at the lesion in his neck where 
Whappo’s teeth severed his jugular (and maybe some 
tendons, for the head dangles to one side). The hook 
enters in the back, between two vertebrae. Mexican ladies 
poke at the dead dog, and it sways reluctantly in the fore- 
noon market-smell of platanos for frying, sweet baby 
carrots from the Red River Valley, trampled raw greens of 
many kinds, cilantro smelling like animal musk, strong 
white onions, pineapples fermenting in the sun, about to 
blow up, great mottled shelves of mountain mushroom. 
Slothrop moves among the bins and hung cloths, invisible, 
among horses and dogs, pigs, brown-uniformed militia, 
Indian women with babies gz in shawls, servants from 
the pastel houses farther up -hillsi plaza is 
seething with life, and Slothrop is puzzled. Isn’t there 
supposed to be only one of each? 

A. Yes. | 

Q. Then one Indian girl... I ; 

A. One pure Indian. One mestiza. One criolla, Then: 
one Yaqui. One Navaho, One Apache— 

Q. Wait a minute, there was only one Indian to begin 
with. The one that Crutchfield killed. 

A. Yes. 

Look on it as an optimization problem. The country 
can best support only one of each. 


Beyond the Zero 81 


Q. Then what about all the others? Boston. London. 
The ones who live in cities. Are those people real, or 
what? 

A. Some are real, and some aren’t. 

Q. Well are the real ones necessary? or unnecessary? 

A. It depends what you have in mind. 

Q. Shit, I don’t have anything in mind. 

A. We do. 

For a moment, ten thousand stiffs humped under the 
snow in the Ardennes take on the sunny Disneyfied look 
of numbered babies under white wool blankets, waiting to 
be sent to blessed parents in places like Newton Upper 
Falls. It only lasts a moment. Then for another moment 
it seems that all the Christmas bells in the creation are 
about to join in chorus—that all their random pealing will 
be, this one time, coordinated, in harmony, present with 
tidings of explicit comfort, feasible joy. 

But segway into the Roxbury hillside. Snow packs into 
the arches, the crosshatchings of his black rubber soles. 
His Ar’tics clink when he moves his feet. The snow in this 
slum darkness has the appearance of soot in a negative... 
it flows in and out of the night.... The brick surfaces by 
daylight (he only sees them in very early dawn, aching 
inside his overshoes, looking for cabs up and down the 
Hill) are flaming corrosion, dense, deep, fallen upon by 
frosts again and again: historied in a way he hasn’t noticed 


- in Beacon Street.... 


} 


- 


In the shadows, black and white holding in a panda- 
pattern across his face, each of the regions a growth or 
mass of scar tissue, waits the connection he’s traveled all 
this way to see. The face is as weak as a housedog’s, and 


f its owner shrugs a lot. 


Slothrop: Where is heP Why didn’t he show? Who are 


you? 


iy 


Voice: The Kid got busted. And you know me, Slo- 
| Sxop. Remember? I’m Never. 
Slothrop (peering): You, Never? (A pause.) Did the 


* - Kenosha Kid? 


0. 


-“Kryptosam” is a proprietary form of stabilized tyrosine, devel- 
_ oped by IG Farben as part of a research contract with OKW. 


82 Gravity's Rainsow 


An activating agent is included which, in the presence of some 
component of the seminal fluid to date [1934] unidentified, pro- 
motes conversion of the tyrosine into melanin, or skin pigment. 
In the absence of seminal fluid, the “Kryptosam” remains invisi- 
ble. No other known reagent, among those available to opera- 
tives in the field, will alter “Kryptosam” to visible melanin. It is 
suggested, in cryptographic applications, that a proper stimulus 
be included with the message which will reliably produce tu- 
mescence and ejaculation, A thorough knowledge of the ad- 
dressee’s psychosexual profile would seem of invaluable aid. 


: —Pror. Dr. Laszio JAMF, 
“Kryptosam” (advertising brochure), Agfa, Berlin, 1934 


The drawing, on heavy cream paper under the black- 
letter inscription GEHEIME KOMMANDOSACHE, is in pen and 
ink, very finely textured, somewhat after the style of von 
Bayros or Beardsley. The woman is a dead ringer for 
Scorpia Mossmoon. The room is one they talked about 
but never saw, a room they would have liked to live in 
one day, with a sunken pool, a silken. tent draped from 
the ceiling—a De Mille set really, slender and oiled girls 
in attendance, a suggestion of midday light coming 
through from overhead, Scorpia sprawled among fat pil- 
lows wearing exactly the corselette of Belgian lace, the 
dark stockings and shoes he daydreamed about often 
enough but never— 

No, of course he never told her. He never told anyone. 
Like every young man growing up in England, he was 
conditioned to get a hardon in the presence of certain 
fetishes, and then conditioned to feel shame about his new 
reflexes. Could there be, somewhere, a dossier, could 
They (They)? somehow have managed to monitor every- 
thing he saw and read since puberty. .. how else would 
They know? 

“Hush,” she whispers. Her fingers stroke lightly her 
long olive thighs, bare breasts swell from the top of her 
garment. Her face is toward the ceiling, but her eyes are 
looking into Pirate’s own, long, narrow with lust, two points 
of light glittering through the thick lashes... “Ill leave © 
him. We'll come here and live. We'll neyer stop making | 
love. I belong to you, I’ve known that for a long time. . 

Her tongue licks out over her little sharpened teeth. Her 
furry quim is at the center of all the light, and there is a 
taste in his mouth he would feel sla meng 


Beyond the Zero 83 


Well, Pirate nearly doesn’t make it, barely gets his cock | 
out of his trousers before he’s spurting all over the place. 
Enough sperm saved, though, to rub over the blank scrap 
enclosed with the picture. Slowly then, a revelation 

through the nacreous film of his seed, in Negro-brown, 
- comes his message: put in a simple Nihilist transposition 
whose keywords he can almost guess. Most of it he does 
in his head. There is a time given, a place, a request for 
help. He burns the message, fallen on him. from higher 
than Earth’s atmosphere, salvaged from Earth’s prime 
meridian, keeps the picture, hmm, and washes his hands. 
- His prostate is aching. There is more to this than he can 
_ see. He has no recourse, no appeal: he has to go over 
there and bring the operative out again. The message is 
tantamount to an order from the highest levels. 
Far way, through the rain, comes the crack-blast of 
_ another German rocket. The third today. They hunt the 
’ sky like Wuotan and his mad army. 
_ Pirate’s own robot hands being to search drawers and 
folders for necessary vouchers and forms. No sleep tonight. 
_ Probably no chance even to catch a cup or. cigarette on 
route. Why? 


O 


_ In Germany, as the end draws upon us, the incessant walls 
read WAS TUST DU FUR DIE FRONT, FUR DEN SIEGP WAS 
HAST DU HEUTE FUR DEUTSCHLAND GETAN? At “The White 
Visitation” the walls read ice. Graffiti of ice the sunless 

_ day, glazing the darkening blood brick and terra cotta as 

_ if the house is to be preserved weatherless in some skin 

of clear museum plastic, an architectural document, an 

_ Old-fashioned apparatus whose use is forgotten. Ice of 

varying thickness, wavy, blurred, a legend to be deci- 

phered by lords of the winter, Glacists of the region, and 
argued over in their journals. Uphill, toward the sea, snow 
gathers like light at all windward edges of the ancient 
bey, its roof long ago taken at the manic whim of 

_ Henry VIII, its walls left to stand and mitigate with saint- 

less window-hollows the salt wind, blowing as the seasons 

play the grass floor in great cowlicks, green to blonde, to 


84 Gravity's RAINBOW 


snow. From the Palladian house down in its resentful and 
twilit hollow this is the only view: the Abbey or else 
gentle, broadly mottled swoops of upland. View of the sea 
denied, though certain days and tides you can smell it, 
all your vile ancestry. In 1925 Reg Le Froyd, an inmate 
at “The White Visitation,” escaped—rushed through the 
upper town to stand teetering at the edge of the cliff, hair 
and hospital garment flickering in the wind, the swaying 
miles of south coast, pallid chalk, jetties and promenades 
fading right and left into brine haze. After him came a 
Constable Stuggles, at the head of a curious crowd. “Don't 
jump!” cries the constable. 

“I never thought of that,” Le Froyd continuing to stare 
out to sea. 

“Then what are you doing here. Eh?” 

“Wanted to look at the sea,” Le Froyd explains. “I’ve 
never seen it. I am, you know, related, by blood, to the 
sea.” 

“Oh aye,” sly Struggles edging up on him all the while, 
“visiting your relatives are you, how nice.” 

“I can hear the Lord of the Sea,” cries Le Froyd, in 
wonder. 

“Dear me, and what’s his name?” Both of them wet- 
faced, shouting for the wind. 

“Oh, I don’t know,” yells Le Froyd, “what would be a 
good name?” 

“Bert,” suggests the constable, trying to remember if it’s 
right hand graps left arm above elbow or left hand 
grasps... . 

Le Froyd turns, and for the first time sees the man, and 
the crowd. His eyes grow round and mild. “Bert is fine,” 
he says, and steps back into the void. 

__ That’s all the townsfolk of Ick Regis had from “The 
White Visitation” in the way of relief—from summers of 
staring at the pink or sun-freckled overflow from Brighton, 
Flotsam and Jetsam casting each day of wireless history 
into song, sunsets on the promenade, lens openings forever 
changing for the sea light, blown now brisk, now sedate 
about the sky, aspirins for sleep—only Le| Froyd’s leap, 
that single entertainment, up till the outbreak of this war. 

At the defeat of Poland, ministerial motorcades were 

suddenly observed at all hours of the night, putting in at 


Beyond the Zero 85 


_ “The White Visitation,” silent as sloops, exhausts well 
- muffled—chromeless black machinery that shone if there 
were starlight, and otherwise enjoyed the camouflage of a 
face about to be remembered, but through the act of 
memory fading too far... . Then at the fall of Paris, a radio 
‘transmitting station was set up on the cliff, antennas aimed 
at the Continent, themselves heavily guarded and their 
landlines back mysteriously over the downs to the house 
patrolled night and day by dogs specially betrayed, belted, 
’ starved into reflex leaps to kill, at any human approach. 
Had one of the Very High gone higher—that is, dottyP 
’ Was Our Side seeking to demoralize the German Beast by 
broadcasting to him random thoughts of the mad, naming 
for him, also in the tradition of Constable Stuggles that 
famous day, the deep, the scarcely seen? The answer is 
yes, all of the above, and more. 
Ask them at “The White Visitation” about the master 
plan of the BBC’s eloquent Myron Grunton, whose melted 
toffee voice has been finding its way for years out the fray- 
ing rust bouclé of the wireless speakers and into English 
dreams, foggy old heads, children at the edges of atten- 
tion. ... He’s had to keep putting his plan off, at first. only 
_ a voice alone, lacking the data he really needed, no sup- 
port, trying to get at the German soul from whatever 
came to hand, P/W interrogations, Foreign Office Hand- 
books, the brothers Grimm, tourist memories of his own 
(young sleepless Dawes-era flashes, vineyards sunlit very 
‘green bearding the south valley-slopes of the Rhine, at 
_ night in the smoke and worsted cabarets of the capital 
long frilled suspenders like rows of carnations, silk stock- 
ings highlighted each in one long fine crosshatching of 
 light...). But at last the Americans came in, and the 
= arrangement known as SHAEF, and an amazing amount of 
: ‘money. 
_ The scheme is called Operation Black Wing. My what 
4 ‘a careful construction, five years in the making. No one 
- could claim it all as his own, not even Grunton. It was 
_ General Eisenhower who laid.down the controlling guide- 
line, the “strategy of truth” idea. Something “real,” Ike 
A insisted on: a hook on the war’s pocked execution-wall to 
g the story from. Pirate Prentice of the $.0.E. came 
with the first hard intelligence that there were in- 


86 Gravity’s Rainsow 


deed in Germany real Africans, Hereros, ex-colonials from 
South-West Africa, somehow active in the secret-weapons 
program. Myron Grunton, inspired, produced on the air 
one night completely ad lib the passage that found its 
way into the first Black Wing directive: “Germany once 
treated its Africans like a stern but loving stepfather, 
chastising them when necessary, often with death. Remem- 
ber? But that was far away in Siidwest, and since then a 
generation has gone by. Now the Herero lives in his step- 
father’s house. Perhaps you, listening, have seen him. Now 
he stays up past the curfews, and watches his stepfather 
while he sleeps, invisible, protected by the night which is 
his own colour. What are they all thinking? Where are the 
Hereros tonight? What are they doing, this instant, your 
dark, secret children?” And Black Wing has even found 
an American, a Lieutenant Slothrop, willing to go under 
light narcosis to help illuminate racial problems in his own 
country. An invaluable extra dimension, Toward the end, 
as more foreign morale data began to come back—Yank 
pollsters with clipboards and squeaky new shoe-pacs or 
galoshes visiting snow-softened liberated ruins to root out 
the truffles of truth created, as ancients surmised, during 
storm, in the instant of lightning blast—a contact in 
American PWD was able to bootleg copies and make 
them available to “The White Visitation.” No one is sure 
who suggested the name “Schwarzkommando.” Myron 
Grunton had favored “Wiitende Heer,” that company of 
spirits who ride the heaths of the sky in furious hunt, 
with great Wuotan at their head—but Myron agreed that 
was more a northern myth. Effectiveness in Bavaria might 
be less than optimum. ; pate ae 

They all talk effectiveness, an American heresy, perhaps 
overmuch at “The White Visitation.” Loudest of all, usu- 
ally, is Mr. Pointsman, often using for ammo statistics pro- 
vided him by Roger Mexico. By the time of the Normandy 
landing, Pointsman’s season of despair was well upon him. 
He came to understand that the great capenceea pincers 
was to be, after all, a success. That this war, this State 
he'd come to feel himself a citizen of, was to be adjourned 
and reconstituted as a peace—and that, professionally 
speaking, he'd hardly got a thing out of it. With funding 
available for all manner of radars, magic torpedoes, air- 
craft and missiles, where was Pointsman in the scheme of 


Beyond the Zero 87 


things? He’d had a moment’s stewardship, that was all: 
his Abreaction Research Facility (ARF), early on snaring 
himself a dozen underlings, dog trainer from the variety 
_. stage, veterinary student or two, even a major prize, the 
refugee Dr. Porkyevitch, who worked with Pavlov him- 
-self at the Koltushy institute, back before the purge trials. 
- Together the ARF team receive, number, weigh, classify 
by Hippocratic temperament, cage, and presently experi- 
ment on as many as a dozen fresh dogs a week. And there 
are one’s colleagues, co-owners of The Book, all now— 
all those left of the original seven—working in hospitals 
_/ handling the battle-fatigued and shell-shocked back from 
"across the Channel, and the bomb- or rocket-happy this 
_ side. They got to watch more abreactions, during these 
_. days of heavy V-bombardment, than doctors of an earlier 
day were apt to see in several lifetimes, and they are able 
\; to suggest ever new lines of inquiry. P.W.E. allows a 
___ stingy dribble of money, desperate paper whispering down 
- ‘the corporate lattice, enough to get by on, enough that 
ARF remains a colony to the metropolitan war, but not 
_ enough for nationhood. ... Mexico’s statisticians chart for 
_ it drops of saliva, body weights, voltages, sound levels, 
metronome frequencies, bromide dosages, number of 
afferent nerves cut, percentages of brain tissue removed, 
dates and hours of numbing, deafening, blinding, castra- 
- tion. Support even comes from Psi Section, a colony 
_ dégagé and docile, with no secular aspirations at all. 
Old Brigadier Pudding can live with this spiritualist 
’ gang well enough, he’s tendencies himself in that direc- 
! tion, But Ned Pointsman, with his constant scheming after 
more money—Pudding can only stare back at the man, try 
ive to be civil. Not as tall as his father, certainly not as whole- 
ie some looking. Father was M.O. in Thunder Prodd’s regi- 
Ment, caught a bit of shrapnel in the thigh at Polygon 
~ Wood, lay silent for seven hours before they, without a 
word before, in that mud, that terrible smell, in, yes 
_ Polygon Wood... or was that—who was. the ginger- 
haired chap who ‘slept with his hat on? ahhh, come back. 
Now Polygon Wood... but it’s fluttering away. Fallen 
_ ‘trees, dead, smooth gray, swirlinggrainoftreelikefrozen- 
Ke moke . . . ginger... thunder...no use, no bleeding use, 
’s gone, another gone, another, oh dear . 
+ The old Brigadier’s age is uncertain, though he must be 


88 Gravity's Rainsow 


pushing 80—reactivated in 1940, set down in a new space 
not only of battlefield—where the front each day or hour 
changes like a noose, like the gold-lit borders of con- 
sciousness (perhaps, though it oughtn’t to get too sinister 
here, exactly like them... better, then, “like a noose”)— 
but also of the War-state itself, its very structure. Pud- 
ding finds himself wondering, at times aloud and in the 
presence of subordinates, what enemy disliked him enough 
to assign him to Political Warfare. One is supposed to be 
operating in concert—yet too often in amazing disso- 
nance—with other named areas of the War, colonies of that 
Mother City mapped wherever the enterprise is systematic 
death: P.W.E. laps over onto the Ministry of Information, 
the BBC European Service, the Special Operations Execu- 
tive, the Ministry of Economic Warfare, and the F.O. 
Political Intelligence Department at Fitzmaurice House. 
Among others. When the Americans came in, their OSS, 
OWI, and Army Psychological Warfare Department had 
also to be coordinated with. Presently there arose the joint, 
SHAEF Psychological Warfare Division (PWD), report- 
ing direct to Eisenhower, and to hold it all together a 
London Propaganda Coordinating Council, which has no 
real power at all. 

Who can find his way about this lush maze of initials, 
arrows solid and dotted, boxes big and small, names 
printed and memorized? Not Ernest Pudding—that’s for 
the New Chaps with their little green antennas out for the 
usable emanations of power, versed in American politics 
(knowing the difference between the New Dealers of 
OWI and the eastern and moneyed Republicans behind 
OSS), keeping brain-dossiers on latencies, weaknesses, tea- 
taking habits, erogenous zones of all, all who might some- 
day be useful. ; 

Ernest Pudding was brought up to believe in a literal 
Chain of Command, as clergymen of earlier centuries be- 
lieved in the Chain of Being. The newer geometries con- 
fuse him. His greatest triumph on the battlefield came in 


1917, in the gassy, Armageddonite filth of the Ypres 


salient, where he conquered a bight of no man’s land 
some 40 yards at its deepest, with a wastage of only 
70% of his unit. He was pensioned off around the begin- 
ning of the Great Depression—went to sit in the study of 


Beyond the Zero 89 


“an empty house in Devon, surrounded by photos of old 
comrades, none of whose gazes quite met one’s own, there 
to go at a spot of combinatorial analysis, that favorite 
pastime of retired Army officers, with a rattling intense 
devotion. 
. It occurred to him to focus his hobby on the European 
_ balance of power, because of whose long pathology he 
had labored, deeply, all hope of waking lost, in the night- 
' mare of Flanders. He started in on a mammoth work en- 
titled Things That Can Happen in European Politics. 
Begin, of course, with England. “First,” he wrote, “Bere- 
‘shith, as it were: Ramsay MacDonald can die.” By the 
time he went through resulting party alignments and pos- 
sible permutations of cabinet posts, Ramsay MacDonald 
had died. “Never make it,” he: found himself muttering at 
_ the beginning of each day’s work—“it’s changing out 
- from under me. Oh, dodgy—very dodgy.” 
_ When it had changed as far as German bombs falling 
- on England, Brigadier Pudding gave up his obsession and 
_again volunteered his services to his country. Had he 
known at the time it would mean “The White Visitation” 
- +. not that he’d expected a combat assignment you know, 
__ but wasn’t there something mentioned about intelligence 
_ work? Instead he found a disused hospital for the mad, a 
_ few token lunatics, an enormous pack of stolen dogs, 
cliques of spiritualists, vaudeville entertainers, wireless 
_ technicians. Couéists, Ouspenskians, Skinnerites, lobotomy 
\ enthusiasts, Dale Carnegie zealots, all exiled by the out- 
_ break of war from pet schemes and manias damned, had 
) the peace prolonged itself, to differing degrees of failure— 
_ but their hopes now focusing on Brigadier Pudding and 
. Possibilities for funding: more hope than Prewar, that 
“only respond province, ever offered. Pudding could 


‘ only respond by adopting rather an Old Testament style 
_ with everyone, including the dogs, and remaining secretly 
baffled and hurt by what he imagined as treachery high 
inside Staff. 

- Snowlight comes in through tall, many-paned windows, 
a dark day, a light burning only here and there among the 
brown offices. Subalterns encrypt, blindfolded subjects call 
Zener-deck guesses to hidden microphones: “Waves... 
Waves...Cross...Star...” While someone from Psi 


90 Gravity’s RaInsow 


Section records them from a speaker down in the cold 
basement. Secretaries in woolen shawls and rubber ga- 
loshes shiver with the winter cold being inhaled through 
the madhouse’s many crevices, their typewriter keys chat- 
tery as their pearlies. Maud Chilkes, who looks from the 
rear rather like Cecil Beaton’s photograph of Margot As- 
quith, sits dreaming of a bun and a cup of tea. 

In the ARF wing, the stolen dogs sleep, scratch, recall 
shadowy smells of humans who may have loved them, 
listen undrooling to Ned Pointsman’s oscillators and metro- 
nomes. The drawn shades allow only mild passages of 
light from outdoors. Technicians are moving behind the 
thick observation window, but their robes, greenish and 
submarine through the glass, flutter more slowly, less 
brightly. ... A numbness has taken over, or a felt darken- 
ing. The metronome at 80 per second breaks out in wooden 
echoes, and Dog Vanya, bound atop the test stand, begins 
to salivate. All other sounds are damped severely: the © 
beams underpinning the lab smothered in sand-filled 
rooms, sandbags, straw, uniforms of dead men occupying 
the spaces between the windowless walls... where the 
country bedlamites sat around, scowling, sniffing nitrous 
oxide, giggling, weeping at an E-major chord modulating 
to a G-sharp minor, now are cubical deserts, stand-rooms, 
keeping the metronome sovereign here in the lab, behind 
the iron doors, closed hermetically. 

The duct of Dog Vanya’s submaxillary gland was long 
ago carried out the bottom of his chin through an incision 
and sutured in place, leading saliva outside to the collect- 
ing funnel, fixed there with the traditional orange Pavloy- 
ian Cement of rosin, iron oxide and beeswax. Vacuum 
brings the secretion along through shining tubework to 
displace a column of light red oil, moving to the right 
along a scale marked off in “drops’—an arbitrary unit, 
probably not the same as the actually fallen drops of 1905, 
of St. Petersburg. But the number of drops, for this lab 
and Dog Vanya and the metronome at 80, is each time 
predictable. 

Now that he has moved into “equivalent” phase, the first 

‘of the transmarginal phases, a membrane, hardly notice- 
able, stretches between Dog Vanya and the outside. In- 
side and outside remain just as they were, but the inter- — 


Beyond the Zero CS 91 


face—the cortex of Dog Vanya’s brain—is changing, in 
any number of ways, and that is the really peculiar thing 
about these transmarginal events. It no longer matters now 
how loudly the metronome ticks. A stronger stimulus no 
longer gets a stronger response. The same number. of 


_ drops flow or fall. The man comes and removes the metrfo- 


ahaa 


nome to the farthest corner of his muffled room, It is 
placed inside a box, beneath a pillow with the machine- 
sewn legend Memories of Brighton, but the drops do not 
fall off ... then played into a microphone and amplifier so 
that each tick fills the room up like a shout, but the drops 
do not increase. Every time, the clear saliva pushes the 
a line over only to the same mark, the same number of 

OpSs.... 

Webley Silvernail and Rollo Groast go sneaky-Peteing 
away down the corridors, nipping into people’s offices to 
see if there are any smokable fag-ends to be looted. Most 
offices right now are empty: all personnel with the patience 

or masochism for it are going through a bit of ritual with 
the doddering Brigadier. 

“That old-man has, no-shame,” Géza Rézsavélgyi, 
another refugee (and violently anti-Soviet, which creates 
a certain strain with ARF) flicking his hands up Brigadier 
Puddingward in gay despair, the lilting Hungarian gypsy- 
whisper bashing like tambourines all around the room, 
provoking, in one way or another, everyone here except 
for the aged Brigadier himself, who just goes rambling 
on from the pulpit of what was a private chapel once, 
back there on the maniac side of the 18th century, and is 
now a launching platform for “The Weekly Briefings,” a 
most amazing volley of senile observations, office paranoia, 
gossip about the War which might or might not include 
violations of security, reminiscences of Flanders... the 
coal boxes in the sky coming straight down on you with a 
roar...the drumfire so milky and luminous on his birth- 
day night . . . the wet surfaces in the shell craters for miles 
giving back one bleak autumn sky... what Haig, in the 


_ richness of his wit, once said at mess about Lieutenant 
Sassoon’s refusal to fight... the gunners in springtime, in 
their flowing green robes... roadsides of poor rotting 


Ly 
¥ 


horses just before apricot sunrise... the twelve spokes of 
a stranded artillery piece—a mud clock, a mud zodiac, 


92 : Graviry’s RAINBOW 


clogged and crusted as it stood in the sun its many shades 
of brown. The mud of Flanders gathered into the curd- 
clumped, mildly jellied textures of human shit, piled, duck- 
boarded, trenched and shell-pocked leagues of shit in all 
directions, not even the poor blackened stump of a tree— 
and the old blithering gab-artist tries to shake the cherry- 
wood pulpit here, as if that had been the worst part of 
the whole Passchendaele horror, that absence of vertical 
interest.... On he goes, gabbing, gabbing, recipes for 
preparing beets in a hundred tasty ways, or such cucurbi- 
taceous improbabilities as Emest Pudding’s Gourd Sur- 
prise—yes, there is something sadistic about recipes with 
“Surprise” in the title, chap who’s hungry wants to just 
eat you know, not be Surprised really, just wants to bite 
into the (sigh) the old potato, and be reasonably sure 
there’s nothing inside but potato you see, certainly not 
some clever nutmeg “Surprisel”, some mashed pulp all 
magenta with pomegranates or something... well but 
this is just the doubtful sort of joke that Brigadier Pud- 
ding loves to play: how he’s chuckled, as unsuspecting 
dinner-guests go knifiing into his notorious Toad-in-the- 
Hole, through the honest Yorkshire batter into—ugh! what 
is it? a beet rissolé? a stuffed beet rissolé? or perhaps to- 
day some lovely pureed samphire, reeking of the séa 
(which he obtains once a week from the same fat fish- 
monger’s son wheeling his bicycle, puffing; up the chalk- 
white cliff)—mnone of these odd, odd vegetable rissoles do 
resemble any ordinary “Toad,” but rather the depraved, 
half-sentient creatures that Young Chaps from Kings Road 
have Affairs With in limericks—Pudding has thousands of 
these recipes and no shame about sharing any of them 
with the lot at PISCES, along with, later in the weekly 
soliloquy, a line or two, eight bars, from “Would You 
Rather Be a Colonel with an Eagle on Your Shoulder, or 
a Private with a Chicken on Your Knee?” then perhaps a 
lengthy recitation of all his funding difficulties, all, dating 
back to long before the emergence of even the Electra 
House group...letter-feuds he has carried on in the 
Times with critics of Haig. . 

And they all sit there, in fron of the at high, blacked, 
lead-crossed windows, allowing him his y, the dog 
people skulking over in one corner, passing notes and 


leaning to whisper (they plot, they plot, ee or afoot © 


a 


Beyond the Zero 93 


they never let up), the Psi Section lot clear over the other 
side of the room—as if we have a parliament of some kind 
here...everyone for years has occupied his own unique 
pew-seat and angle in to the ravings of reddish and liver- 
spotted Brigadier Pudding—with the other persuasions-in- 
exile spread between these two wings: the balance of 
power, if any power existed at “The White Visitation.” 

_ Dr. Rézsavélgyi feels that there well might, if the fel- 
lows “play their cards right.” The only issue now is sur- 
vival—on through the awful interface of V-E Day, on into 
the bright new Postwar with senses and memories intact. 
PISCES must not be allowed to go down under the ham- 
mer with the rest of the bawling herd. There must arise, 
and damned soon, able to draw them into a phalanx, a 
concentrated point of light, some leader or program power- 
ful enough to last them across who knows how many years 
of Postwar. Dr. Rézsavélgyi tends to favor a powerful 

' program over a powerful leader. Maybe because this is 
1945. It was widely believed in those days that behind 
the War—all the death, savagery, and destruction—lay the 
Fiihrer-principle. But if personalities could be replaced by 
abstractions of power, if techniques developed by the 

_ corporations could be brought to bear, might not nations 
live rationallyP One of the dearest Postwar hopes: that 
there should be no room for a terrible disease like cha- 
risma ... that its rationalization should proceed while we 
had the time and resources. ... 

_ Isn’t that what’s really at stake for Dr. Rézsavélgyi here 

_ in this latest scheme, centered on the figure of Lieutenant 

 Slothrop? All the psychological tests in the subject’s dossier, 
clear back to his college days, indicate a diseased per- 

_ sonality. “Rosie” slaps the file with his hand for emphasis. 

_ The staff table shudders. “For exam-ple: his Minneso-ta, 

’ Mul-tipha-sic Personality Inventory is tremen-dously lopsi- 
ded, always in fa-vor of, the psycho-pathic, and, the un- 

_ whole-some.” 

But the Reverend Dr. Paul de la Nuit is not fond of 
the MMPI. “Rosie, are there scales for measuring inter- 
personal traits?” Hawk's nose probing, probing, eyes low- 
ered in politic meekness, “Human values? Trust, honesty, 

‘love? Is there—forgive me the special pleading—a re- 

ligious scale, by any chance?” 

4q No way, padre: the MMPI was developed about 1943. 


94 Gravity's RAINBOW 


In the very heart of the War. Allport and Vernon’s Study 
of Values, the Bernreuter Inventory as revised by Flana- 
gan in ’35—tests from before the War—seem to Paul de 
la Nuit more humane. All the MMPI appears to test for 
is whether a man will be a good or bad soldier. 

“Soldiers are much in demand these days, Reverend 
Doctor,” murmurs Mr. Pointsman. 

“I only hope that we don’t put too much emphasis on 
his MMPI scores. It seems to me very narrow. It omits 
large areas of the human personality.” 

“Precise-ly why,” leaps Rézsavélgyi, “we are now pro- 
posing, to give, Sloth-rop a complete-ly dif-ferent sort, of 
test. We are now design-ing for him, a so-called, “projec- 
tive’ test. The most famil-iar exam-ple of the type, is the 
Rorschach ink-blot. The ba-sic theory, is, that when given 
an unstruc-tured stimulus, some shape-less blob of exper- 
ience, the subject, will seek to impose, struc-ture on it. 
How, he goes a-bout struc-turing this blob, will reflect his 
needs, his hopes—will provide, us with clues, to his 
dreams, fan-tasies, the deepest re-gions of his mind.” Eye- 
brows going a mile a minute, extraordinarily fluid and 
graceful hand gestures, resembling—most likely it is de- 
liberate, and who can blame Rosie for trying to cash in— 
those of his most famous compatriot, though there're the 
inevitable bad side-effects: staff who swear they’ve seen him 
crawling headfirst down the north facade of “The White 
Visitation,” for example. “So we are re-ally, quite, in agree- 
ment, Reverend Doctor. A test, like the MMPI, is, in this 
respect, not adequate. It is, a struc-tured stimulus. The 
sub-ject can fal-sify, consciously, or repress, un-consciously. 
But with the projec-tive technique, nothing he can do, con- 
scious or otherwise, can pre-vent us, from fin-ding what we 
ee to know. We, are in control. res cannot help, him- 
self.” 

“Must say it doesn’t sound like ae cup of tea, Points- 
man,” smiles Dr. Aaron Throwster. “Your stimuli are more 
the structured sort, aren’t they?” 

“Let’s say I find a certain shameful faseiintiot.” 

“Let’s not. Don’t tell me youre going to ehi3 your nate 

Pavlovian hand completely out of this.” 


“Well, not completely, Throwster, no. “Since you've 
brought it up. We also happen to have in mind a very 


SS es 


Beyond the Zero 95 


Bessotned stimulus. Same one, in fact, that got us in- 
terested to begin with. We want to expose Slothrop to the 
German rocket... .” 

Overhead, on the molded plaster ceiling, Methodist ver- 
sions of Christ’s kingdom swarm: lions cuddle with lambs, 
fruit spills lushly and without pause into the arms and 
about the feet of gentlemen and ladies, swains and milk- 
‘maids. No one’s expression is quite right. The wee crea- 
tures leer, the fiercer beasts have a drugged or sedated 

look, and none of the humans have any eye-contact at all. 
The ceilings of “The White Visitation” aren’t the only 
erratic thing about the place, either. It is a classic “folly,” 
all right. The buttery was designed as an Arabian harem 
in miniature, for reasons we can only guess at today, full 
of silks, fretwork and peepholes. One of the libraries 
served, for a time, as a wallow, the floor dropped three 
‘feet and replaced with mud up to the thresholds for giant 
Gloucestershire Old Spots to frolic, oink, and cool their 
summers in, to stare at the shelves of buckram books and 
wonder if they’d be good eating. Whig eccentricity is car- 
ried in this house to most unhealthy extremes. The rooms 
are triangular, spherical, walled up into mazes. Portraits, 
studies in genetic curiosity, gape and smirk at you from 
every vantage. The W.C.s contain frescoes of Clive and 
his elephants stomping the French at Plassy, fountains that 
depict Salome with the head of John (water gushing out 
ears, nose, and mouth), floor mosaics in which are tes- 
-sellated together different versions of Homo Monstrosus, 
an interesting preoccupation of the time—cyclops, hu- 
“manoid giraffe, centaur repeated in all directions. Every- 
where are archways, grottoes, plaster floral arrangements, 
‘walls hung in threadbare velvet or brocade. Balconies give 
out at unlikely places, overhung with gargoyles whose fangs 
‘have fetched not a few newcomers nasty cuts on the head. 
Even in the worst rains, the monsters only just manage to 
drool—the rainpipes feeding them are centuries out of 
‘Yepair, running crazed over slates and beneath eaves, past 
cracked pilasters, dangling Cupids, terra-cotta facing on 
every floor, along with belvederes, rusticated joints, pseudo- 
palin columns, looming minarets, leaning crooked chim- 

from a distance no two observers, not matter how 
‘lose they stand, see quite the same building in that orgy 


= é > 
96 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


of self-expression, added to by each succeeding owner, 
until the present War’s requisitioning. Topiary trees line 
the drive for a distance before giving way to larch and 
elm: ducks, bottles, snails, angels, and steeplechase riders 
they dwindle down the metaled road into their fallow 
silence, into the shadows under the tunnel of sighing trees. 
The sentry, a dark figure in white webbing, stands port- 
arms in your masked headlamps, and you must halt for 
him. The dogs, engineered and lethal, are watching you 
from the woods, Presently, as evening comes on, a few 
bitter flakes of snow begin to fall, 


O 


Better behave yourself or we'll send you back to Dr. Jaméf] 
When Jamf conditioned him, he threw away the stimulus. 


Looks like Dr, Jamf’s been to see your little thing 
today, hasn’t he? 


—Neil Nosepicker’s Book of 50,000 Insults, 
§6.72, “Awful Offspring,” 
The Nayland Smith Press, 
Cambridga | (Mass.), 1933 


Puppinc:, But isn’t this— 
POINTSMAN: Sir? 
Puppinc: Isn’t it all rather shabby, Pointsman? Med- 
dling with another man’s mind this way? 
PoinTsMAN: Brigadier, we're only following in a lon 
line of experiment and questioning. Harvard University, © 
the U.S. Army? Hardly shabby institutions, . 
Puppinc: We can’t, Pointsman, it’s beastly. f 
PornTsmaN: But the Americans have already been at’ 
- him! don’t you see? It’s not-as if we're corrupting a virgin 
or something— . pepe, | 
Puppinc: Do we have to do it because the Americans _ 
do it? Must we allow them to corrupt us? 
Back around 1920, Dr. Laszlo Jamf opined that if Wat- 
son and Rayner could successfully condition their “Infant 
Albert” into a reflex horror of everything furry, even of his _ 
own Mother in a fur boa, then Jamf could certainly do the 


| 


Beyond the Zero 97 


same thing for his Infant Tyrone, and the baby’s sexual 
reflex. Jamf was at Harvard that year, visiting from Darm- 
stadt. It was in the early part of his career, before he 
phased into organic chemistry (to be as fateful a change 
of field as Kekulé’s own famous switch into chemistry from 
‘architecture, a century before). For the experiment he had 
a slender grant from the National Research Council (under 
‘a continuing NRC program of psychological study which 
had begun during the World War, when methods were 
needed for selecting officers and classifying draftees). 
Shoestring funding may have been why Jamf, for his tar- 

get reflex, chose an infant hardon. Measuring secretions, as 

Pavlov did, would have meant surgery. Measuring “fear,” 
the reflex Watson chose, would have brought in too much 
subjectivity (what’s fear? How much is “a lot”? Who 
decides, when it’s on-the-spot-in-the-field, and there isn’t 
time to go through the long slow process of referring it up 

to the Fear Board?). Instrumentation just wasn’t available 
in those days. The best he might’ve done was the Larson- 

Keeler three-variable “lie detector,” but at the time it was 
still only experimental. 

But a hardon, that’s either there, or it isn’t. Binary, 
elegant. The job of observing it can even be done by a 
student. 

Unconditioned stimulus = stroking penis with antisep- 
tic cotton swab. 

Unconditioned response = hardon. 

Conditioned stimulus = x. 
| Conditioned response = hardon whenever x is present, 
stroking is no longer necessary, all you need is that x. 

Uh, x? well, what’s x? Why, it’s the famous “Mystery 
Stimulus” that’s fascinated generations of behaviorial- 
psychology students, is what it is. The average campus 

umor magazine carries 1.05 column inches per year on 
the subject, which ironically is the exact mean length Jamf 
reported for Infant T.’s erection. 

_ Now ordinarily, according to tradition in these matters, 
the little sucker would have been de-conditioned. Jamf 
would have, in Pavlovian terms, “extinguished” the hardon 
ren he'd built up, before he let the baby go. Most likely 
he did. But as Ivan Petrovich himself said, “Not only must 
we speak of partial or of complete extinction of a condi- 


98 Gravity's Rainsow 


tioned reflex, but we must realize that extinction can. pro- 
ceed beyond the point of reducing a reflex to zero. We 
cannot therefore judge the degree of extinction only by 
the magnitude of the reflex or its absence, since there can 
still be a silent extinction beyond the zero,” Italics are Mr. 
Pointsman’s, 

Can a conditioned reflex survive in a man, dormant, 
over 20 or 30 yearsP Did Dr. Jamf extinguish only to 
zero—wait till the infant showed zero hardons in the pres- 
ence of stimulus x, and then stop? Did he forget—or ig- 
nore—the “silent extinction beyond the zero”? If he ig- 
nored it, why? Did the National Research Council have 
anything to say about that? 

When Slothrop was discovered, late in 1944, by “The 
White Visitation”—though many there have always known 
him as the famous Infant Tyrone—like the New World, 
different people thought they’d discovered different things, 

Roger Mexico thinks it’s a statistical oddity, But he feels 
the foundations of that discipline trembling a bit now, 
deeper than oddity ought to drive. Odd, odd, odd—think 
of the word: such white finality in its closing clap of 
tongue. It implies moving past the tongue-stop—beyond 
the zero—and into the other realm. Of course you don’t 
move past. But you do realize, intellectually, that’s how 
you ought to be moving. és 

Rollo Groast thinks it’s precognition. “Slothrop is able 
to predict when a rocket will fall at a particular place, His 
survival to date is evidence he’s acted on advance informa- 
tion, and avoided the area at the time the rocket was 
supposed to fall.” Dr. Groast is not sure how, or even if, 
sex comes into it. a 

But Edwin Treacle, that most Freudian of psychical | 
researchers, thinks Slothrop’s gift is psychokinesis, Slo- 
throp is, with the force of his mind, causing the rockets to 
drop where they do. He may not be physically highballing 
them about the sky: but maybe he is fooling with. the 
electrical signals inside the rocket’s guidance system. 
However he’s doing it, sex does come into Dr. Treacle’s 
theory. “He subconsciously needs to abdlish all trace of 
the sexual Other, whom he symbolizes on his map, most 
significantly, as a star, that anal-sadistic emblem of class- 
room success which so permeates elementary education in 


America... .” a 
| 


Beyond the Zero 99 


It’s the map that spooks them all, the map Slothrop’s 
been keeping on his girls. The stars fall in a Poisson dis- 
tribution, just like the rocket strikes on Roger Mexico's - 
map of the Robot Blitz. 

-But,. well, it’s a bit more than. the distribution. The two 
patterns also happen to be identical. They match up square 
for square. The slides that Teddy Bloat’s been taking of 
Slothrop’s map have been projected onto Roger's, and the 
two images, girl-stars and rocket-strike circles, demon- 
strated to. coincide. 

Helpfully, Slothrop has dated most of his stars. A star 
always comes before its corresponding rocket strike. The 
strike can come as quickly as two days, or as slowly as 
ten. The mean lag is about 414 days. 

Suppose, Pointsman argues, that Strobe’s stimulus x was 
some loud: noise, as it was in the. Watson-Rayner experi- 
ment. Suppose that, in Slothrop’s case, the hardon reflex 

_ wasn’t completely extinguished. In-that case he ought to 
be getting one on at any loud noise that’s preceded by 
the same kind of ominous buildup he would’ve found in 
Jamf’s lab—as dogs to this day find in Pointsman’s own > 
lab. The points to the V-1: any doodle close enough to 
make him jump ought to be giving him an erection: the 
sound of the motor razzing louder and louder, then the 
cutoff and silence, suspense building up—then the ex- 
plosion. Boing, a hardon. But oh, no. Slothrop instead only 
gets erections when this sequence happens in reverse. Ex- 
plosion first, then the sound of approach: the V-2. 

But the stimulus, somehow, must be the rocket, some 
precursor wraith, some rocket’s double present for Slo- 

op in the percentage of smiles on a bus, menstrual 

__ cycles being operated upon in some mysterious way—what 

__ does make the little doxies do it for free? Are there fluctua- 
tions in the sexual market, in pornography or prostitutes, 
perhaps tying into prices on the Stock Exchange itself, 
that we clean-living lot know nothing about? Does news 

_ from the front affect the itch between their pretty thighs, 

_ does desire grow directly or inversely as the real chance 

_ of sudden death—damn it, what cue, right in front of our 

eyes, that we haven’t the subtlety of heart to seeP... — 

But if it’s in the air, right here, right now, then the 

_ rockets follow from it, 100% of the time. No exceptions. 

_ When we fiind it, we'll have shown again the stone 


100 Gravity's Ramnsow 


determinacy of everything, of every soul. There will be 
precious little room for any hope at all. You can see how 
important a discovery like that would be. 

They walk down past the snow-drifted kennel runs, 
Pointsman in Glastonburys and fawn-colored British warm, 
Mexico wearing a scarf Jessica’s lately knitted him whip- 
ping landward a scarlet dragon’s tongue—this day the 
coldest so far of the winter, 39 degrees of frost. Down to 
the cliffs, faces freezing, down to the deserted beach. 
Waves run up, slide away to leave great crescents of ice 
fine as skin and dazzling in the weak sunlight. The boots 
of the two men crunch through to sand or shingle. The 
very bottom of the year. They can hear the guns in Flan- 
ders today, all the way across the Channel on the wind. The 
Abbey’s ruin stands gray and crystal up on the cliff. 

Last night, in the house at the edge of the stay-away 
town, Jessica, snuggling, afloat, just before sleep was to 
take them, whispered, “Roger... what about the girls?” 
That was all she said. But it brought Roger wide awake. 
And bone-tired as he was, he lay staring for another hour, 
' wondering about the girls. 

Now, knowing he ought to let it go, “Pointsman, what if 
Edwin Treacle is right? That it’s PK. What if Slothrop’s— 
not even consciously—making them fall where they do?” 

“Well. You lot’d have something then, wouldn’t you.” 

“But...why should he. If they are falling wherever 
he’s been—” 

“Perhaps he hates women.” 

“Tm serious.” 

“Mexico. Are you actually worried?” 

“I don’t know. Perhaps I wondered if it might tie in, in 
any way, with your ultraparadoxical phase. Perhaps...I 
want to know what youre really looking for.” 

Above them now throb a flight of B-17s, bound some- 
where uncommon today, well out of the usual corridors of 
flight. Behind these Fortresses the undersides of the cold 
clouds are blue, and their smooth billows are veined in 
blue—elsewhere touched with grayed-out pink or pur- 
ple.... Wings and stabilizers are shadowed underneath 
in dark gray. The shadows softly feather lighter up around 
curves of fuselage or nacelle. Spinners emerge from hooded 
dark inside the cowlings, spinning props invisible, the 


: 


Beyond the Zero 101 


light of the sky catching all vulnerable surfaces a uniform 
bleak gray. The planes drone along, stately, up in the zero 
sky, shedding frost as it builds, sowing the sky behind in 
white ice-furrows, their own color matching certain de- 
grees of cloud, all the tiny windows and openings in soft 
blackness, the perspex nose shining back forever warped 
and streaming cloud and sun. Inside it is black obsidian. 
Pointsman has been talking about paranoia and the “idea 
of the opposite.” He has scribbled in The Book exclama- 
tion points and how trues all about the margins of Pay- 
lov’s open letter to Janet concerning the sentiments dem- 
prise, and of Chapter LV, “An Attempt at a Physiological 
Interpretation of Obsessions and of Paranoia”—he can’t 
help this bit of rudeness, although the agreement among 
the seven owners was not to mark up The Book—it was 
too valuable for that sort of thing, they’d had to put in a 
guinea apiece. It was sold him on the sly, in the dark, 
during a Luftwaffe raid (most existing copies had been 
destroyed in their warehouse early in the Battle of Britain). 
Pointsman never even saw the seller’s face, the man van- 
ishing into the hoarse auditory dawn of the all-clear, leay- 
ing the doctor and The Book, the dumb sheaf already heat- 
ing up, moistening in his tight hand... yes it might have 
been a rare work of erotica, certainly that coarse hand-set 
look to the type...the crudities in phrasing, as if Dr. 
Horsley Gantt’s odd translation were in cipher, the plain- 
text listing shameful delights, criminal transports. ... And 
how much of the pretty victim straining against her bonds 
does Ned Pointsman see in each dog that visits his test 
stands...and aren’t scalpel and probe as decorative, as 
fine extensions as whip and cane? 
ve Surely the volume preceding The Book—the first 
% Forty-one Lectures—came to him at age 28 like a man- 
_ date from the submontane Venus he could not resist: to 
© abandon Harley Street for a journey more and more 
b deviant, deliciously on, into a labyrinth of conditioned- 
- teflex work in which only now, thirteen years along the 
__ lew, he’s beginning to circle back, trip across old evidence 
a te having come that path before, here and there to con- 
front consequences of his younger, total embrace... . But 
she did warn him—did she not? was he ever listening?— 


(= Pid the deferred payment, in its full amount. Venus and 


102 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


Ariadne! She seemed worth any price, the labyrinth look- 
ing, in those days, too intricate for them—the twilit pimps 
who made the arrangement between a version of himself, 
a crypto-Pointsman, and his fate... too varied, he thought 
then, ever to find him in. But he knows now. Too far in, 
preferring not to face it just yet, he knows that they only 
wait, stone and sure—these agents of the Syndicate she 
must also pay—wait in the central chamber, as he draws 
closer.... They own everything: Ariadne, the Minotaur, 
even, Pointsman fears, himself. He gets flashes of thenr 
these days, naked, athletes poised and breathing about the 
chamber, terrible penises up mineral as their eyes, which 
glisten with frost or flakes of mica, but not with lust, or 
for him. It’s only a job they have.... 

“Pierre Janet—sometimes the man talked like an Orien- 
tal mystic. He had no real grasp of the opposites. “The act 
of injuring and the act of being injured are joined in the 
behavior of the whole injury.’ Speaker and spoken-of, 
master and slave, virgin and seducer, each pair most con- 
veniently coupled and inseparable— The last refuge of the 
incorrigible lazy, Mexico, is just sort of yang-yin rubbish. 
One avoids all manner of unpleasant lab work that way, 
but what has one said?” 

“T don’t want to get into a religious argument with you,” 
absence of sleep has Mexico more cranky than usual, “but 
I wonder if you people aren’t a bit too—well, strong, on 
the virtues of analysis. I mean, once you've taken it all 
apart, fine, I'll be first to applaud your industry. But 
other than a lot of bits and pieces lying about, what have 
you said?” 

It isn’t the sort of argument Pointsman relishes either. 
But he glances sharply at this young anarchist in his red 
scarf. “Pavlov believed that the ideal, the end we all 
struggle toward in science, is the true mechanical explana- 
tion. He was realistic enough not to expect it in his life-— 
time. Or in several lifetimes more. But his hope was fora — 
long chain of better and better approximations. His faith 
ultimately lay in a pure physiological basis for the life of 
the psyche. No effect without cause, and ; clear train of — 
linkag es.” 

“Its not my forte, of course,” Mexico Riess: wishniga 
not to offend the man, but really, “but there’s a feeling r. 


Beyond the Zero 103 


about that cause-and-effect may have been taken as far as 
it will go. That for science to carry on at all, it must look 
for a less narrow, a less... sterile set of assumptions. The 
next great breakthrough may come when we have the 
courage to junk cause-and-effect entirely, and strike off at 
some other angle.” 

“No—not ‘strike off.’ Regress. You’re 30 years old, man. 
There are no ‘other angles.’ There is only forward—into 
it—or backward.” 

Mexico watches the wind tugging at the skirts of Points- 
man’s coat. A gull goes screaming away sidewise along 
the frozen berm. The chalk cliffs rear up above, cold and 
serene as death, Early barbarians of Europe who ventured 
close enough to this coast saw these white barriers through 
the mist, and knew then where their deed had been taken 
to. 

_ Pointsman has turned now, and... oh, God. He is smil- 

ing. There is something so ancient in its assumption of 
brotherhood that—not now, but a few months from now, 
with spring prevailing and the War in Europe ended— 
Roger will remember the smile—it will haunt him—as the 
most evil look he has ever had from a human face. 

They've paused in their walking. Roger stares back at the 
man. The Antimexico. “Ideas of the opposite” themselves, 
but on what cortex, what winter hemisphere? What ruinous 
mosaic, facing outward into the Waste... outward from 
the sheltering city...readable only to those who jour- 

“ney outside...eyes in the distance... barbarians... 
riders. ... 

Ee both have Slothrop,” is what Pointsman has just 
said. 

_ “Pointsman—what are you expecting out of this? Be- 

sides glory, I mean.” < 

_ “No more than Pavloy. A physiological basis for what 

Seems very odd behavior. I don’t care which of your 

'P.R.S. categories it may fit into—oddly enough none of 

you's even suggested telepathy: perhaps he’s tuned in to 
omeone over there, someone who knows the German firing 

03 shedule ahead of time. Eh? And I don’t care if it’s some 

terrible Freudian revenge against his mother for trying to 

astrate him or something. I am not grandiose, Mexico, _ 

|am modest, methodical—” 


104 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


“Humble.” 

“T have set myself limitations in this. I have only the 
reversal of rocket sounds to go on... his clinical history 
of sexual conditioning, perhaps to auditory stimuli, and 
what appears to be a reversal of cause-and-effect. I’m not 
as ready as you to junk cause-and-effect, but if it does 
need modifying—so be it.” 

“But what are you after?” 

“You've seen his MMPI. His F Scale? Falsifications, 
distorted thought processes. ... The scores show it clearly: 
he’s psychopathically deviant, obsessive, a latent para- 
noiac—well, Pavlov believed that obsessions and paranoid 
delusions were a result of certain—call them cells, neurons, 
on the mosaic of the brain, being excited to the level 
where, through reciprocal induction, all the area around 
becomes inhibited. One bright, burning point, surrounded 
by darkness. Darkness it has, in a way, called up. Cut off, 
this bright point, perhaps to the end of the patient’s life, 
from all other ideas, sensations, self-criticisms that might 
temper its flame, restore it to normalcy. He called it a 
‘point of pathological inertia.’ We're working right now 
with a dog... he’s been through the ‘equivalent’ phase, 
where any stimulus; strong or weak, calls up exactly the 
same number of saliva drops... and on through the ‘para- 
doxical’ phase—strong stimuli getting weak responses and 
vice versa. Yesterday we got him to go ultraparadoxical. 
Beyond. When we turn on the metronome that used to 
stand for food—that once made Dog Vanya drool like a 
fountain—now he turns away. When we shut off the 
metronome, oh then he'll turn to it, sniff, try to lick it, 
bite it—seek, in the silence, for the stimulus that is not 
there. Pavlov thought that all the diseases of the mind 
could be explained, eventually, by the ultraparadoxical 
phase, the pathologically inert points on the cortex, the 
confusion of ideas of the opposite. He died at the very 
threshold of putting these things on an experimental basis. 
But I live. I have the funding, and the time, and the will. 
Slothrop is a strong imperturbable. It won't be easy to 
send him into any of the three phases. bats y finally have 
to starve, terrorize, I don’t know. int come to 


that, But I will find his spots of mers 1 will find what — 


they are if I have to open up his damned skull, and how 


— ee | ee 


Beyond the Zero 105 


they are isolated, and perhaps solve the mystery of why 
the rockets are falling as they do—though I admit that 
was more of a sop to get your support.” 

“Why?” A bit uneasy, there, Mexico? “Why do you need 
me?” 

“I don’t know. But I do.” 

“You're obsessed.” 

“Mexico.” Standing very still, seaward half of his face 
seeming to have aged fifty years in the instant, watching 
the tide of three full times leave behind its sterile film of 
ice. “Help me.” 

I can't help any one, Roger thinks. Why is he so 
tempted? It’s dangerous and perverse. He does want to 
help, he feels the same unnatural fear of Slothrop that 
Jessica does. What about the girls? It may be his loneliness 
in Psi Section, in a persuasion he can’t in his heart share, 
nor. quite abandon... their faith, even smileless Gloam- 

 ing’s, that there must be more, beyond the senses, beyond 
_ death, beyond the Probabilities that are all Roger has to 
believe in.... Oh Jessie, his face against her bare, sleep- 
ing, intricately boned and tendoned back, I’m out of my 
depth in this.... ; 
_ Halfway between the water and the coarse-sea-grass, a 
long stretch of pipe and barbed wire. rings in the wind. 
_ The black latticework is propped up by longer slant- 
ing braces, lances pointing out to sea. An abandoned and 
mathematical look: stripped to the force-vectors holding 
it where it is, doubled up in places one row behind 
_ another, moving as Pointsman and Mexico begin to move 
_ again, backward in thick moiré, repeated uprights in 
parallax against repeated diagonals, and the snarls of wire 
below interfering more at random. Far away, where it 
_ curves into the haze, the openwork wall goes gray. After 
last night’s snowfall, each line of the black scrawl was 
_ etched in white. But today wind and sand have blown the 
' dark iron bare again, salted, revealing, in places, brief 
_ steaks of rust... in others, ice and sunlight turn the con- 
_ Struction to electric-white lines of energy. 
Farther up, past buried land mines and antitank posts of 
_ corroding concrete, up in a pillbox covered with netting 
and sod, halfway up the cliff, young Dr. Bleagh and his 
_ ‘nurse Ivy are relaxing after a difficult lobotomy. His 


106 Gravity’s RAINBow 


scrubbed and routinized fingers dart in beneath her sus- 
pender straps, pull outward, release in a sudden great 
smack and ho-ho-ho from Bleagh as she jumps and laughs 
too, trying not too hard to squirm away. They lie on a bed 
of faded old nautical charts, maintenance manuals, burst 
sandbags and spilled sand, bummed matchsticks and un- 
raveled cork-tips from cigarettes long decomposed that 
comforted through the nights of ’41 and the sudden rush 
of heart at any glimpse of a light at sea. “You're mad,” she 
whispers. “I’m randy,” he smiles, and snaps her garter 
again, boy-and-slingshot. 

In the uplands a line of cylindrical blocks to cripple 
the ‘silent King Tigers that now will never roll the land 
chains away like so many white muffins across the dun 


pasture, among the low patches of snow and the pale lime 


outcrops. Out on a little pond the black man is down from 
London, ice-skating, improbable as a Zouave, riding his 
blades tall, dignified, as if born to them and ice not desert. 
Small townschildren scatter before him, close enough to 
have their cheeks stung by curved wakes of powdered ice 
whenever he turns. Until he smile they dare not speak, 
only follow, tag, flirt, wanting the smile, fearing it, want- 
ing it.... He has a magic face, a face they know. From 
the shore, Myron Grunton and Edwin Treacle, both chain- 
smoking, brooding over Operation Black Wing and the 
credibility of the Schwarzkommando, watch their magic 
Negro, their prototype, neither caring to risk the ice, lop- 
ing Fen or any style, in front of these children. 

The winter’s in suspense—all the sky a bleak, luminous 
gel. Down on the beach, Pointsman fishes a roll of toilet 


paper, each sheet stenciled Property or H.M. GovERN- — 


MENT, from a pocket to blow his nose. Roger now and 
then pushes hair back under his cap. Neither speaks. So, 
the two of them: trudging, hands in and out of pockets, 
their figures dwindling, fawn and gray and a lick of 
scarlet, very sharp-edged, their footprints behind them a 
long freezing progress of exhausted stars, the overcast re- 
flecting from the glazed beach nearly white.... We have 
lost them. No one listened to those early conversations— 
not even an idle snapshot survives. They walked till that 
winter hid them and it seemed the cruel Channel itself 
would freeze over, and no one, none of us, could ever com- 


ms eee i 


Beyond the Zero “TOF 


pletely find them again. Their footprints filled with ice, 
and a little later were taken out to sea. 


‘yi 


‘In silence, hidden from her, the camera follows as she 
moves deliberately nowhere longlegged about the rooms, 
an adolescent wideness and hunching to the shoulders, her 
hair not bluntly Dutch at all, but secured in a modish up- 
sweep with an old, tarnished silver crown, yesterday’s new 
perm leaving her very blonde hair frozen on top in a 
hundred vortices, shining through the dark filigree. Widest 
lens-opening this afternoon, extra tungsten light laid on, 
this rainiest day in recent memory, rocket explosions far 
away to south and east now and then visiting the maison- 
, ette, rattling not the streaming windows but only the 
doors, in slow three- and fourfold shudderings, like poor 
‘spirits, desperate for company, asking to be let in, only a 
moment, a touch. 
~ She’s alone in the house, except for the secret camera- 
man and Osbie Feel, who’s out in the kitchen, doing some- 
thing mysterious with a harvest of mushrooms from up on 
the roof. They have shiny red-orange cups with raised 
patches of whitish-gray veil. Now and then the geometry 
of her restlessness brings her to glace in a doorway at his 
boyish fussing with the Amanita muscaria (for it is this 
‘peculiar relative of the poisonous Destroying Angel that 
claims Osbie’s attention, or what passes with him for at- 
‘tention)—flash him a smile she means to be friendly but 
which to Osbie seems terribly worldly, sophisticated, 
wicked. She being the first Dutch girl he’s ever spoken to, 
he’s surprised at finding high heels instead of wooden 
“shoes, struck in fact a bit witless by her so groomed and 
(he imagines) Continental style, the intellect behind the 
fair-lashed eyes or dark glasses she affects out on the 
street, behind the traces of baby fat, the dimples counter- 
sunk each side of her mouth, (In closeup her skin, though 
nearly perfect, is seen to be lightly powdered and: rouged, 
the eyelashes a touch darkened, brows reshaped a matter 
‘of two or three empty follicles. . 
What can young Osbie possibly have in mind? He is 


108 Gravity's RaInsow 


carefully scraping out the inside of each persimmon-colored 
mushroom cup and shredding the rest. Dispossessed elves 
run around up on the roof, gibbering. He now has a grow- 
ing heap of orange-gray fungus, which he proceeds to add 
in fistfuls to a pot of steaming water. A previous batch 
also simmers atop the stove, reduced to a thick gruel 
covered with yellow scum, which Osbie now removes and 
purees further in Pirate’s blending machine. Then he 
spreads the fungoid mush over a tin cookie sheet. He opens 
the oven, removes with asbestos potholders another sheet 
covered with dark caked dust, and replaces it with the 
one he has just prepared. With a mortar and pestle he 
pulverizes the substance and dumps it into an old Huntley 
& Palmers biscuit tin, reserving only enough to roll deftly 
up in a Rizla liquorice cigarette paper, light, and inhale 
the smoke of. 

But she happens to’ve glanced in just at the instant 
Osbie opened the echoing oven. The camera records no 
change in her face, but why does she stand now so im- 
mobile at the door? as if the frame were to be stopped and 
prolonged into just such a lengthwise moment of gold fresh 
and tarnished, innocence microscopically masked, her el- 
bow slightly bent, hand resting against the wall, fingers 
fanned on the pale orange paper as if she touches her own 
skin, a pensive touch. ... Outside, the long rain in silicon 
and freezing descent smacks, desolate, slowly corrosive 
against the mediaeval windows, curtaining like smoke the 
river's far shore. This city, in all its bomb-pierced miles: 
this inexhaustibly knotted victim...skin of glistening 
roofslates, sotted brick flooded high about each window 
dark or lit, each of a million openings vulnerable to the 
gloom of this winter day. The rain washes, drenches, fills 
the gutters singing, the city receives it, lifting, in a per- 
petual shrug... . With a squeak and metal slam the oven 
is closed again, but for Katje it will never close. She has 
posed before the mirrors too often today, knows her hair 
and make-up are perfect, admires the frock they have 
brought her from Harvey Nicholls, a sheer crepe that flows 
in from padded shoulders down to a deep point between 
her breasts, a rich cocoa shade known as \“nigger” in this 
country, yards and yards of this delicious silk spun and. 
thrown, tied loosely at the waist, soft pleats falling to her 


tae 
Pe Beyond the Zero 109 


knees. The cameraman is pleased at the unexpected effect 
‘of so much flowing crepe, particularly when Katje passes 
‘before a window and the rainlight coming through 
changes it for a few brief unshutterings to murky glass, 
ccharcoal-saturated, antique and weather-wom, frock, face, 
hair, hands, slender calves all gone to glass and glazing, 
for the celluloid instant poised—the translucent guardian 
‘of a rainfall shaken through all day by rocket blasts near 
-and far, downward, dark and ruinous behind her the 
‘ground which, for the frames’ passage, defines her.  ~ 
» At the images she sees in the mirror Katje also feels a 
cameraman’s pleasure, but knows what he cannot: that in- 
side herself, enclosed in the soignée surface of dear fabric 
and dead cells, she is corruption and ashes, she belongs in 
a way none of them can guess cruelly to the Oven... to 
Der Kinderofen ... remembering now his teeth, long, ter- 
tible, veined with bright brown rot as he speaks these 
words, the yellow teeth of Captain Blicero, the network of 
stained cracks, and back in his nightbreath, in the dark 
oven of himself, always the coiled whispers of decay.... 
She recalls his teeth before any other feature, teeth were 
to benefit most directly from the Oven: from what is 
planned for her, and for Gottfried. He never uttered it 
clearly as threat, nor ever addressed to either of them di- 
rectly, but rather across her trained satin thighs to the eve- 
ning’s guests, or down the length of Gottfried’s docile spine 
(“the Rome-Berlin Axis” he called it the night the Italian 
‘came and they were all on the round bed, Captain Blicero 
\plugged into Gottfried’s upended asshole and the Italian 
at the same time into his pretty mouth) Katje only passive, 
bound and gagged and false-eyelashed, serving tonight as 
human pillow for the Italian’s whitening perfumed curls 
(roses and fat just at the edge of turning rancid) ... each 
utterance a closed flower, capable of exfoliation and in- 
finite revealing (she thinks of a mathematical function 
t will expand for her bloom-like into a power series with 
no general term, endlessly, darkly, though never completely 
by surprise) ...his phrase Padre Ignacio unfolding into 
Spanish inquisitor, black robes, brown arching nose, the 
‘suffocating smell of incense + confessor/executioner + 
Katje and Gottfried both kneeling, side by side in dark 
confessional + children out of old Marchen kneeling, knees 
is 


110 Gravity's Rainsow 


cold and aching, before the Oven, whispering to it secrets 
they can tell no one else + Captain Blicero’s witch- 
paranoia, suspecting them both, Katje despite her NSB 
credentials + the Oven as listener/avenger + Katije 
kneeling before Blicero in highest drag, black velvet and 
Cuban heels, his penis squashed inyisible under a flesh- 
colored leather jockstrap, over which he wears a false 
cunt and merkin of sable both handcrafted in Berlin by 
the notorious Mme. Ophir, the mock labia and bright pur- 
ple clitoris molded of—Madame had been abject, pleading 
shortages—synthetic rubber and Mipolam, the new poly- 
vinyl chloride... tiny blades of stainless steel bristle from 
lifelike pink humidity, hundreds of them, against which 
Katje, kneeling, is obliged to cut her lips and tongue, and 
then kiss blood-abstracts across the golden ungessoed back 
of her “brother” Gottfried. Brother in play, in slavery... 
she had never seen him before coming to the requisi- 
tioned house near the firing sites, hidden in the woods and 
parkland of this settled tongue of small farms and estates 
that reaches eastward from the royal city, between two 
expanses of polder, toward Wassenaar—yet his face, for 
that first time, seen in autumn sunlight through the great 
west window of the drawing-room, kneeling naked except 
for a studded dog collar, masturbating metronomic, at 
shouted commands from Captain Blicero, all his fair skin 
stained by afternoon a luminous synthetic orange she has 
never before associated with skin, his penis a blood mono- 
lith, its thickly gasping mouth audible in the carpeted 
silence, his face raised to none of them, but as if to some- 
thing on the ceiling, or in the sky which ceilings may in 
his vision stand_for, eyes-down as he seems most of the 
time to be—his face, ascending, tightening, coming, is so 
close to what she’s been seeing all her life in mirrors, her 
own studied mannequin’s stare, that she catches her breath, 
feels for a moment the speeded percussion of her heart, 
before just such a stare toward Blicero, He is delighted, 
“Perhaps,” he tells her, “I will cut your hair.” He smiles at 
Gottfried. “Perhaps I'll have him grow his.” The humilia- 
tion would be good for the boy each morning at quarters, 
ranked with his battery near SchuBstelle!3, where horses 
thundered once before the frantic, the losing railbirds of 
the old peace—failing inspections time after time yet pro- 


Beyond the Zero 111 


tected by his Captain from Army discipline. Instead, be- 
tween firings, day or night, short of sleep, odd hours, 
suffering the Captain’s own “Hexesziichtigung.” But did 
Blicero also cut her hair? She can’t remember now. She 
knows she wore Gottfried’s uniforms once or twice (push- 
‘ing her hair, yes, up under his forage cap), looking easily 
his double, spending these nights “in the cage,” as Blicero 
‘has set the rules, while Gottfried must wear her silk stock- 
ings, her lace apron and cap, all her satin and her rib- 
boned organdy. But afterward he must always go back 
again to the cage, That’s how it is. Their Captain allows 
no doubt as to which, brother or sister, really is maid- 
servant, and which fattening goose. 

How seriously is she playing? In a conquered country, 
one’s own occupied country, it’s better, she believes, to 
enter into-some formal, rationalized version of what, out- 
side, proceeds without form or decent limit day and night, 
‘the summary executions, the roustings, beatings, subter- 
fuge, paranoia, shame...though it is never discussed 
among them openly, it would seem Katje, Gottfried, and 
Captain Blicero have agreed that this Northern and an- 
cient form, one they all know and are comfortable with— 
the strayed children, the wood-life in the edible house, 
the captivity, the fattening, the Oven—shall be their pre- 
serving routine, their shelter, against what outside none of 
them can bear—the War, the absolute rule of chance, 
their own pitiable contingency here, in its midst. . 

It isn’t safe, even inside, in the house . Thearly every 
\day a rocket misfires, Late in October, not far from this 
estate, one fell back and exploded, killing 12 of the 
ground crew, breaking windows for hundreds of meters all 
around, including the west window of the drawing-room 
where Katje first saw her golden game-brother. The official 
tumor stated that only fuel and oxidizer had gone off. But 
Captain Blicero, with a trembling—she must say nihilis- 
tic—pleasure, said that the Amatol charge in the warhead 
had also exploded, making them as much target as launch 
‘site.... That they were all condemned. The house lies 
west of the Duindigt racecourse, quite the other direction 
‘from London, but no bearing is exempt—often the rockets, 
crazed, turn at random, whinnying terribly in the sky, turn 
about and fall according each to its madness so unreach- 
me: 


- 


oe 
.. 


112 Gravity’s Rainsow 


able and, it is feared, incurable, When there’s time to, 
their owners destroy them, by radio, in mid-convulsion, 
Between rocket launches there are the English raids, Spit- 
fires come roaring in low over the dark sea at suppertime, 
the searchlights in the city staggering on, the after-hum of 
sirens hangs in the sky high above the wet iron seats in the 
parks, the AA guns chug, searching, and the bombs fall in 
woodland, in polder, among flats thought to be billeting 
rocket troops. 

It adds an overtone to the game, which changes the 
timbre slightly. It is she who, at some indefinite future 
moment, must push the Witch into the Oven intended for 
Gottfried. So the Captain must allow for the real chance 
she’s a British spy, or member of the Dutch underground. 
Despite all German efforts, intelligence inputs still flow 
from Holland back to RAF Bomber Command. in a steady 
torrent, telling of deployments, supply routes, of which 
dark-green crumble of trees may hide an A4 emplace- 
ment—data changing hour-to-hour, so mobile are the 
rockets and their support equipment. But the Spitfires will 
settle for a power station, a liquid-oxygen supply, a bat- 
tery commander’s billet... that’s the intriguing question. 
Will Katje feel her obligation canceled by someday calling 
down English fighter-bombers on this very house, her 
game’s prison, though it mean death? Captain Blicero 
can’t be sure. Up to a point he finds the agony delightful. 
Certainly her record with Mussert’s people is faultless, she’s 
credited with smelling out at least three crypto-Jewish 
families, she attends meetings faithfully, she works at a 
Luftwaffe resort near Scheveningen, where her superiors 
find her efficient and cheerful, no shirker. Nor, like so 
many of them, using party fanaticism to cover a lack of 
ability. Perhaps there’s the only shadow of warning: her 
commitment is not emotional. She appears to have reasons 
for being in the Party. A woman with some background in 
mathematics, and with reasons,... “Want the Change,” 
Rilke said, “O be inspired by the Flamel” To laurel, to 
nightingale, to wind... wanting it, to he taken, to em- 
brace, to fall toward the flame growing to fill all the 
senses and.,.not to love because it no longer pos- 
Bile to act... but to be helplessly in a condition of 
OVE. +4. lish 


q 


Beyond the Zero 113 


But not Katje: no mothlike plunge. He must conclude 
that secretly she fears the Change, choosing instead only 
trivially to revise what matters least, ornament and cloth- 
ing, going no further than politic transvestism, not only in 
Gottfried’s clothing, but even in traditional masochist uni- 
form, the French-maid outfit so inappropriate to her tall, 
longlegged stride, her blondeness, her questing shoulders 
like wings—she plays at this only... plays at playing. 

_ He can do nothing. Among dying Reich, orders lapsing 
to paper impotence he needs her so, needs Gottfried, the 
straps and whips leathern, real in his hands which still 
feel, her cries, the red welts across the boy’s buttocks, their 
mouths, his penis, fingers and toes—in all the winter these 
are sure, can be depended on—he can give you no reason 
but in his heart he trusts, perhaps only, by now, in the 
form, this out of all Marchen und Sagen, trusts that this 
charmed house in the forest will be preserved, that no 
bombs could ever fall here by accident, only betrayal, only 
if Katje really were a spotter for the English and bade 
them—and he knows she cannot: that through some magic, 
below the bone resonance of any words, a British raid is 
the one prohibited. shape of all possible pushes from be- 
hind, into the Oven’s iron and final summer. It will come, 
it will, his Destiny ... not that way—but it will come.... 

Und nicht einmal sein Schritt klingt aus dem tonlosen 
Los. ... Of all Rilke’s poetry it’s this Tenth Elegy he most 
loves, can feel the bitter lager of Yearning begin to prickle 
behind eyes and sinuses at remembering any passage of 
:..the newly-dead youth, embracing his Lament, his last 

, leaving now even her marginally human touch for- 
ever, climbing all alone, terminally alone, up and up into 
the mountains of primal Pain, with the wildly alien con- 
Stellations overhead.... And not once does his step ring 
from the soundless Destiny. . . . It’s he, Blicero, who climbs 
the mountain, has been so climbing for nearly 20 years, 
Since long before he embraced the Reich’s flame, since 
Siidwest ... alone. No matter what flesh was there to ap- 
pease the Witch, cannibal, and sorcerer, flourishing im- 
plements of pain—alone, alone. He doesn’t even know the 
Witch, can’t understand the hunger that defines him/her, 
is only, in times of weakness,. bewildered that it should 
coexist in the same body as himself. An athlete and his 


SS, 
qt: 


, 


114 Gravity's Rainsow 


skill, separate awarenesses.... Young Rauhandel at least 
had said so... how many years back into the peace. 
Blicero had watched his young friend (even then alneady 
so blatantly, so pathetically doomed to some form of East- 
ern Front) inside a bar, out in the street, wearing what- 
ever tight or awkward suit, whatever fragile shoes, react 
in all grace to the football which jokers would recognizing 
him toss out of nowhere—the deathless performances! that 
one impromptu boot so impossibly high, so perfectly para- 
bolic, the ball soaring miles to pass exactly between the 
two tall, phallic electric columms of the Ufa-theatre on the 
Friedrichstrasse ... the head-control he could keep up for 
city blocks, for hours, the feet articulate as poetry. ... Yet 
he could only shake his head, wanting to be a good fellow 
when they asked, but unable really to say—“It’s... it 
happens... the muscles do it—” then recalling an old 
trainer’s words—“it’s muscular,” smiling beautifully and 
already, by the act, conscripted, already cannon fodder, 
the pale bar-light across the grating of his close-shaved 
skull—“it’s reflexes, you see.... Not me.... Just the re- 
flexes.” When did it begin to change for Blicero, among 
those days, from lust to simple sorrow, dumb as Rauhan- 
del’s amazement with his own talent? He seen so many 
of these Rauhandels, especially since ’39, harboring the 
same mysterious guests, strangers, often no more bizarre 
than a gift for being always where shells were not. ..do 
any of them, this raw material, “want the Change”? Do 
they even know? He doubts it.... Their reflexes are only 
being used, hundreds of thousands at a time, by others— 
by royal moths the Flame has inspired. Blicero has lost, 
years ago, all his innocence on this question. So his Des- 
tiny is the Oven: while the strayed children, who never 
knew, who change nothing but uniforms and cards of 
identity, will survive and prosper long beyond his gases 
and cinders, his chimney departure, So, so, A Wandervogel 
in the mountains of Pain. It’s been going on for much too 
long, he has chosen the game for nothing if not the kind 
of end. it will bring him, nicht wahr? too old these days, 
.grippes taking longer to pass, stomach too often in day- 
long agony, eyes measurably blinder with each examina= 
tion, too “realistic” to prefer a hero’s death or even @ 
soldier's. He only wants now “to be out of the’ winter, in- 


3 


| 


Beyond the Zero 115 


side the Oven’s warmth, darkness, steel shelter, the door 
behind him in a narrowing rectangle of kitchen-light gong- 
ing shut, forever. The rest is foreplay. 

Yet he cares, more than he should and puzzled that he 
does, about the children—about their motives. He gathers 
it is their freedom they look for, yearningly as he for the 
Oven, and such perversity haunts and depresses him. 

_ he returns again and again to the waste and senseless 
image of what was a house in the forest, reduced now to 
crumbs and sugar-smears, the black indomitable Oven all 
that remains, and the two children, the peak of sweet 
energy behind them, hunger beginning again, wandering 
away into a green blankness of trees.... Where will they 
go, where shelter the nights? The improvidence of chil- 
dren...and the civil paradox of this their Little State, 
whose base is the same Oven which must destroy it.... 

But every true god must be. both organizer and de- 
stroyer. Brought up into a Christian ambience, this was 
difficult for him to see until his journey to Siidwest: until 
his own African conquest. Among the abrading fires of the 
Kalahari, under the broadly-sheeted coastal sky, fire and 
water, he learned. The Herero boy, long tormented by 
missionaries into a fear of Christian sins, jackal-ghosts, 
potent European strand-wolves, pursuing him, seeking to 
feed on his soul, the precious worm that lived along his 
backbone, now tried to cage his old gods, snare them in| 
words, give them away, savage, paralyzed, to this scholarly 
white who seemed so in love with language. Carrying in 

his kit a copy of the Duino Elegies, just off the presses 
when he embarked for Siidwest, a gift from Mother at the 

_ boat, the odor of new ink dizzying his nights as the old 
_ freighter plunged tropic after tropic... until the constella- 

_ tions, like the new stars of Pain-land, had become all un- 

_ familiar and the earth’s seasons reversed... and he came 
_ ashore in a high-powered wooden boat that had 20 years 

earlier brought blue-trousered troops in from the iron 

_ toadstead to crush the great Herero Rising. To find, back 

* in the hinterland, up in an outstretch of broken mountains 

iS between the Namib and the Kalahari, his own faithful 

. native, his night-flower. 

An impassable waste of rock blasted at by the sun... 
es of canyons twisting nowhere, drifted at the bottoms 


116 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


with white sand turning a cold, queenly blue as the after- 
noons lengthened.... We make Ndjambi Karunga now, 
omuhona ...a whisper, across the burning thom branches 
where the German conjures away energies present outside 
the firefight with his slender book. He looks up in alarm. 
The boy wants to fuck, but he is using the Herero name 
of God. An extraordinary chill comes over the white man. 
He believes, like the Rhenish Missionary Society who cor- 
rupted this boy, in blasphemy. Especially out here in the 
desert, where dangers he can’t bring himself to name even 
in cities, even in daylight, gather about, wings folded, 
buttocks touching the cold sand, waiting.... Tonight he 
feels the potency of every word: words are only an eye- 
twitch away from the things they stand for. The peril of 
buggering the boy under the resonance of the sacred 
Name fills him insanely with lust, lust in the face—the 
mask—of instant talion from outside the fire... but to the 
boy Ndjambi Karunga is what happens when they couple, 
that’s all: God is creator and destroyer, sun and darkness, 
all sets of opposites brought together, including black and 
white, male and female...and he becomes, in his in- 
nocence, Ndjambi Karunga’ s child (as are all his preterite 
clan, relentlessly, beyond their own history) here under- 
neath the European’s sweat, ribs, gut-muscles, cock (the 
boy’s own muscles staying fiercely tight for what seems 
hours, as if he intends to kill, but not a word, only the 
long, clonic, thick slices of night that pass over their 
bodies) . 

What did I make of him? Captain Blicero knows that 
the African at this moment is halfway across Germany, 
deep in the Harz, and that, should the Oven this winter 


close behind him, why they have already said auf Wieder- — 


sehen for the last time. He sits, stomach crawling, glands 
stuffed with malaise, bowed over the console, inside the 
swarm-painted launch-control car. The sergeants at motor 
and steering panels are out taking a se break—he’s 
alone at the controls. Outside, through the dirty peri- 
scope, gnarled fog unloosens from the brigt zone of frost 


that belly-bands the reared and shadowy rocket, where the | 


liquid-oxygen tank’s being topped off. s press close: 
overhead you see barely enough sky for the rocket’s ascent. 


The Bodenplatte—concrete plate laid over strips of steel— — 


a 


ee 


BD 
ae 
¥ _ nicht eine Hand voll Erde ins Tal, die alle unsigliche, 

a sondern ein erworbenes Wort, reines, den gelben und blaun 


Beyond the Zero 117 


is set inside a space defined by three trees, blazed so as to 
triangulate the exact bearing, 260°, to London. The sym- 
bol used is a rude mandala, a red circle with a thick black 
cross inside, recognizable as the ancient sun-wheel from 
which tradition says the swastika was broken by the early 
Christians, to disguise their outlaw symbol. Two nails are 
driven into the tree at the center of the cross, Next to one 
of the painted blaze-marks, the most westerly, someone — 
has scratched in the bark with the point of a bayonet the 
words IN HOC sIGNO viINCcES. No one in the battery will 
admit to this act. Perhaps it is the work of the Under- 
ground. But it has not been ordered removed. Pale yellow 
stump-tops wink around the Bodenplatte, fresh chips and 
sawdust mix with older fallen leaves. The smell, childlike, 
deep, is confused by petrol and alcohol. Rain threatens, 
perhaps, today, snow, The crews move nervously gray- 
green. Shiny black India-rubber cables snake away into 
the forest to connect the ground equipment with the 
Dutch grid’s 380 volts. Erwartung. ... 

For some reason he finds it harder these days to remem- 
ber. What is framed, dirt-blurry, in the prisms, the ritual, 
the daily iteration inside these newly cleared triangles in 
the forests, has taken over what used to be memory’s ran- 
dom walk, its innocent image-gathering. His time away, 
with Katje and Gottfried, has become shorter and more 
precious as the tempo of firings quickens. Though the boy 
is in Blicero’s unit, the captain hardly sees him when 
theyre on duty—a flash of gold helping the surveyors 
chain the kilometers out to the transmitting station, the 
guttering brightness of his hair in the wind, vanishing 
among trees.... How strangely opposite to the African— 
a color-negative, yellow and blue. The Captain, in some 
sentimental overflow, some precognition, gave his African 
boy the name “Enzian,” after Rilke’s mountainside gentian 
of Nordic colors, brought down like a pure word to the 
valleys: 


Bringt doch der Wanderer auch vom Hange des Bergrands 


118 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


“Omuhona. . - Look at me. I’m red, and brown.. 
black, omuhona.’. 

“Liebchen, this is the other half of the earth. In Ger- 
many you would be yellow and blue.” Mirror-metaphysics. 
Self-enchanted by what he imagined elegance, his bookish 
symmetries. ... And yet why speak so purposeless to the 
arid mountain, the heat of the day, the savage flower from 
whom he drank, so endlessly... why lose those words 
into the mirage, the yellow sun and freezing blue shad- 
ows in the ravines, unless it was prophesying, beyond all 
predisaster syndrome, beyond the terror of contemplating 
his middle age however glancingly, however impossible 
the chance of any “providing’—beyond was something 
heaving, stirring, forever below, forever before his words, 
something then that could see a time coming terrible, at 
least as terrible as this winter and the shape to which the 
War has now grown, a shape making unavoidable the 
shape of one last jigsaw piece: this Oven-game with the 
yellowhaired and blueeyed youth and silent doubleganger 
Katje (who was her opposite number in Siidwest? what 
black girl he never saw, hidden always in the blinding 
sun, the hoarse and cindered passage of the trains at night, 
a constellation of dark stars no one, no anti-Rilke, had 
named ...)—but 1944 was much too late for any of it to 
matter. Those symmetries were all prewar luxury. Nothing’s 
left him to prophesy. 

Least of all her sudden withdrawal from the game. The 
one variation he didn’t provide for, perhaps indeed be- 
cause he never saw the black girl either. Perhaps the black 
girl is a genius of meta-solutions—knocking over the chess- 
board, shooting the referee. But after the act of wound- 
ing, breaking, what’s to become of the little Oven-stateP 
Can’t it be fixed? Perhaps a new form, one more appro- 
priate... the archer and his son, and the shooting of the 
apple...yes and the War itself as tyrant king... it can 
still be ‘salvaged can’t it, patched up, roles reassigned, no 
need to rush outside where . 

Gottfried, in the cage, watches her slip be bonds and 


go. Fair and slender, the hair on his legs pe y visible in — 
t 


sunlight and then as a fine, imponderable of gold, ia 
eyelids already wrinkling in oddly young/old signatures, 


flourishes, the eyes a seldom-encountered blue that on g 


ae Meg 
igs Beyond the Zero 119 
certain days, in syne with the weather, is too much for 
_ these almond fringes and brims over, seeps, bleeds out to 
- illuminate the boy’s entire face, virgin-blue, drowned-man 
blue, blue drawn so insatiably into the chalky walls of 

Mediterranean streets we quietly cycled through in noon- 
- times of the old peace.... He can’t stop her. If the Cap- 

tain asks, he'll tell what he saw. Gottfried has seen her 
sneak out before, and there are rumors—she’s with the 

Underground, she’s in love with a Stuka pilot she met in 
, Scheveningen.... But she must love Captain Blicero too. 

Gottfried styles himself a passive observer. He has waited 

for his present age, and the conscription notice, to catch 
_ him, with an impudent terror like watching the inrush of 
_ a curve you mean to take for the first time in a controlled 
_ skid, take me, gathering speed till the last possible mo- 
_ ment, take me his good-nights’ one prayer. The danger he 
. thinks he needs is still fictional for him: in what he flirts 
and teases with, death is not a real outcome, the hero 
_ always walks out of the heart of the explosion, sooty-faced 

but grinning—the blast is noise and change, and diving for 
_ cover. Gottfried hasn’t yet seen a stiff, not up close. He 

hears now and then from home that friends have died, 
_ he’s. watched long, flabby canvas sacks being handled in 
_ the distances into the poisoned gray of the trucks, and the 
headlamps cutting the mist... but when the rockets fail, 
and try to topple back on you who fired them, and a dozen 
of you press down, bodies jammed together in the slit 
trenches waiting all sweat-stunk wool and tense with 
laughter held in, you only think—What a story to tell at 
mess, to write to Mutti.... These rockets are his pet ani- 
_ mals, barely domesticated, often troublesome, even apt to 
revert. He loves them in the way he would have loved — 
eres, or Tiger tanks, had he pulled duty somewhere 
- else. 

_ Here he feels taken, at true ease. Without the War what 
could he have hoped for? But to be part of this adventure 
++.Tf you cannot sing Siegfried at least you can carry a 
_ Spear, On what mountainslope, from what tanning and 
_ adored face did he hear that? All he remembers is the 
‘white sweep upward, the quilted meadows mobbed with 
Cloud. ... Now he’s learning a trade, tending the rockets, 
when the War. ends he'll study to be an engineer. He 


{<¢ 
| mat 
ia - 


120 Graviry’s Ramnsow 


understands that Blicero will die or go away, and that he 
will leave the cage. But he connects this with the end of 
the War, not with the Oven. He knows, like everyone, 
that captive children are always freed in the moment of 
maximum danger. The fucking, the salt length of the 
Captain’s weary, often impotent penis pushing into his 
meek mouth, the stinging chastisements, his face reflected 
in the act of kissing the Captain’s boots, their shine mot- 
tled, corroded by bearing grease, oil, alcohol spilled in 
fueling, darkening his face to the one he can’t recognize— 
these are necessary, they make specific his captivity, which 
otherwise would hardly be different from Army stifling, 
Army repression. He’s ashamed that he enjoys them so 
much—the word bitch, spoken now in a certain tone of 
voice, will give him an erection he cannot will down— 
afraid that, if not actually judged and damned, he’s gone 
insane. The whole battery knows of the arrangement: | 
though they still obey the Captain it’s there, in their faces, 
felt trembling out along the steel tape-measures, splashing 
onto his tray at mess, elbowed into his right sleeve with 
each dressing of his squad. He dreams often these days of 
a very pale woman who wants him, who never speaks— 
but the absolute confidence in her eyes... his awful cer- 
tainty that she, a celebrity everyone recognizes on sight, 
knows him and has no reason to speak to him beyond the 
beckoning that’s in her face, sends him vibrating awake in 
the nights, the Captain’s exhausted face inches away across 
the silk of wrinkled silver, weak eyes staring as his own, 
whiskers he suddenly must scrape his cheek against, sob- 
bing, trying to tell how she was, how she looked at 
him.. 

The Captain’s seen her, of course. Who hasn’tP His idea 
of comfort is to tell the child, “She’s real. You have no say 
in this. You must understand that she means to have you. - 
No use screaming awake, bothering me this way.” 

“But if she comes back—” 

“Submit, Gottfried. Give it all wp. See where she takes 
you. Think of the first time I fucked you. How tight you 
were. Until you knew I meant to come side Your little 
rosebud bloomed. You had pot not even by then you 
mouth’s innocence, to lose. . 

But the boy continues to cry. Katje won't hale him. Pere 


: 


Beyond the Zero 121 


haps she’s asleep. He never knows. He wants to be her 
friend, but they hardly ever speak. She’s cold, mysterious, 
he’s jealous of her sometimes and at others—usually when 
he wants to fuck her and through some ingenuity of the 
Captain’s cannot—at such times he thinks he loves her 
desperately. Unlike the Captain, he has never seen her as 
‘the loyal sister who'll free him from the cage. He dreams 
that release, but as a dark exterior Process that will hap- 
pen, no matter what any of them may want. Whether she 
goes or stays. So, when Katje quits the game for good, he 
is silent. 

Blicero curses her. He flings a boot-tree at a precious 
TerBorch. Bombs fall to the west in the Haagsche Bosch. 
The wind blows, ruffling the ornamental ponds outside. 
‘Staff cars snarl away, down the long drive lined with 
beeches. The half-moon shines among hazy clouds, its dark 
half the color of aged meat. Blicero orders everyone down 
into the shelter, a cellarful of gin in brown crocks, open-slat 
crates of anemone bulbs. The slut has put his battery in 
the British crosshairs, the raid can come at any moment! 
Everybody sits around drinking oude genever and peeling 
cheeses. Telling stories, mostly funny ones, from before 
the War. By dawn, they've all drunk and sleeping. Scraps 
of wax litter the floor like leaves. No Spitfires come. But 
later that morning SchuBstelle 3 is moved, and the requi- 
sitioned house is abandoned. And she is gone. Crossed over 
the English lines, at the salient where the great airborne 
adventure lies bogged for the winter, wearing Gottfried’s 
boots and an old dress, black moiré, calf-length, a size too 
\large, dowdy. Her last disguise. From here on she will be 
'Katje. The only debt outstanding is to Captain Prentice. 
The others—Piet, Wim, the Drummer, the Indian—have 
call dropped her. Left her for dead. Or else this is her 
warning that— 

“Sorry, no, we need the bullet,” Wim’s face in shadows 
Her eye can’t compensate for bitterly whispering under- 
neath the Scheveningen pier, ragged crowd-footfalls on ° 
the wood overhead, “every fucking bullet we can get. We 
need the silence. We couldn’t spare a man to get rid of 
the body. I’ve wasted five minutes with you already .. 

‘so he will take up their last meeting with technical matters 
ihe can no longer share. When she looks around, he’s 


~ 


122 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


gone, guerrilla-silent, and she has no way to bring this 
together with how he felt last year for a while under the 
cool chenille, in the days before he got so many muscles, 
_and the scars on shoulder and thigh—a late bloomer, a 
neutral man goaded finally past his threshold, but she’d 
loved him before that ...she must have.... 

She’s worth nothing to them now. They were after 
SchuBstelle 3. She gave them everything else, but kept 
finding reasons not to pinpoint the Captain’s rocket site, 
and there is too much doubt by now as to how good the 
reasons were, True, the site was often moved about. But 
she could’ve been placed no closer to the decision-making: 
it was her own expressionless servant’s face that leaned in 
over their schnapps and cigars, the charts coffee-ringed 
across the low tables, the cream papers stamped purple as 
bruised flesh. Wim and the others have invested time and 
lives—three Jewish families sent east—though wait now, - 
she’s more than balanced it, hasn’t she, in the months out 
at Scheveningen? They were kids, neurotic, lonely, pilots 
and crews they all loved to talk, and she’s fed back who 
knows how many reams’ worth of Most Secret flimsies 
across the North Sea, hasn’t she, squadron numbers, fuel- 
ing stops, spin-recovery techniques and turing radii, 
power settings, radio channels, sectors, traffic patterns— 
hasn’t she? What more do théy want? She asks this 
seriously, as if there’s a real conversion factor. between 
information and lives. Well, strange to say, there is. Writ- 
ten down in the Manual, on file at the War Department. 
Don’t forget the real business of the War is buying and 
selling. The murdering and the violence are self-policing, 
and can be entrusted to non-professionals. The mass nature — 
of wartime death is useful in many ways. It serves as 
spectacle, as diversion from the real movements of the 
War. It provides raw material to be recorded into History, 
so that children may be taught History as sequences of 
violence, battle after battle, and be more prepared for the 
adult world, Best of all, mass death’s a stimulus to just | 
ordinary folks, little fellows, to try 1’ grab a piece of that — 
Pie while they’re still here to gobble it up. The true war is — 
a celebration of markets. Organic auleets | oabokully styled — 
“black” by the professionals, spring up everywhere. Scrip, 
Sterling, Reichsmarks continue to move, severe as classical _ 


Cay 
ae Beyond the Zero 123 
ballet, inside their antiseptic marble chambers. But out 
here, down’ here among the people, the truer currencies 
come into being. So, Jews are negotiable. Every bit as 
negotiable as cigarettes, cunt, or Hershey bars. Jews also 
carry an element of guilt, of future blackmail, which op- 
erates, natch, in favor of the professionals. So Katje here 
is hollering into a silence, a North Sea of hopes, and 
Pirate Prentice, who knows her from hurried meetings—in 
‘city squares that manage to be barracksfaced and claus- 
_trophobic, under dark, soft-wood smells of staircases steep 
as ladders, on a gaffrigger by an oily quai and a cat’s 
amber eyes staring down, in a block of old flats with rain 
in the courtyard and a bulky, ancient Schwarzlose stripped 
to toggle links and oil pump littered about the dusty 
room—who has each time seen her as a face belonging 
with others he knows better, at the margin of each enter- 
| prise, now, confronted with this face out of context, an 
‘enormous sky all sea-clouds in full march, tall and plum, 
‘behind her, detects danger in her loneliness, realizes he’s 
never heard her name, not till the meeting by the wind- 
mill known as “The Angel.” ... 

She tells him why she’s alone—more or less—why she 
can’t ever go back, and her face is somewhere else, painted 
on canvas, hung with other survivals. back in the house 
near Duindigt, only witnessing the Oven-game—centuries 
passing like the empurpled clouds, darkening an infinitesi- 
mal layer of varnish between herself and Pirate, granting 
her the shield of serenity she needs, of classic irrele- 
vance. ... 

“But where will you go?” Both of them hands in pockets, 
scarves tightly wrapped, stones the water has left behind 
‘shining black wait like writing in a dream, about to make 
‘sense printed here along the beach, each fragment so 
amazingly clear yet... 

_ “I don't know. Where would be a good place?” 
_ “The White Visitation,’ ” Pirate suggested. 

“‘The White Visitation’ is fine,” she said, and stepped 
into the void.... 

_ “Osbie, have I gone mad?” a snowy night, five rocket 


My 
mB, a) 


bombs since noon, shivering in the kitchen, late and can- 
‘dlelit, Osbie Feel the house idiot-savant so far into an en- 
counter with nutmeg this evening that the inquiry seems 


124 } Graviry’s RAINBow 


quite proper, the pale cement Jungfrau asquat, phlegmatic 
and one gathers nettled in a dim corner. 

“Of course, of course,” sez Osbie, with a fluid passage 
of fingers and wrist based on the way Bela Lugosi handed 
a certain glass of doped wine to some fool of a juvenile 
lead in White Zombie, the first movie Osbie ever saw and in 
a sense the last, ranking on his All-Time List along with Son 
of Frankenstein, Freaks, Flying Down to Rio and perhaps 
Dumbo, which he went to see in Oxford Street last night 
but midway through noticed, instead of a magic feather, 
the humorless green and magenta face of Mr. Emest 
Bevin wrapped in the chubby trunk of the longlashed baby 
elephant, and decided it would be prudent to excuse him- 
self, “No,” since Pirate meantime has misunderstood what- 
ever it was Osbie said, “not ‘of course you've gone mad, 
Prentice,’ that wasn’t it at all... .” 

“What then,” Pirate asks, after Osbie’s lapse has passed 
the minute mark. 

“Ah?” sez Osbie. 

Pirate is having second thoughts, is what it is. He keeps 
recalling that Katje now avoids all mention of the house in 
the forest. She has glanced into it, and out, but the truth’s 
crystal sheets have diffracted all her audible words—often 
to tears—and he can’t quite make sense of what’s spoken, 
much less infer to the radiant crystal itself. Indeed, why 
did she leave SchuBstelle 3? We are never told why. But 
now and then, players in a game will, lull or crisis, be 
reminded how it is, after all, really play—and be unable 
then to continue in the same spirit.... Nor need it be 
anything sudden, spectacular—it may come in gentle—and_ 
regardless of the score, the number of watchers, their 
colléctive wish, penalties they or the Leagues may impose, 
the player will, waking deliberately, perhaps with Katje’s 
own tough, young isolate’s shrug and stride, say fuck it 
and quit the game, quit it cold.... 

“All right,” he continues alone, Osbie lost in a moon- 
ing doper’s smile, tracking the mature female snow-skin 
of the Alp in the corner, he and the frozen peak above” 
and the blue night... “it’s a lapse of character then, a 
crotchet. Like carrying the bloody Mendoza.” Everyone 
else in the Firm packs a Sten you know. The Mendoza 
weighs three times as much, no one’s even seen any 7 ™ 


oe Beyond the Zero 125 
Mexican Mauser bullets lately, even in Portobello Road: it 
hasn’t the grand Garage Simplicity or the rate of fire and 
still he loves it (yes, most likely it’s love these days) “you 
see, it’s a matter of trade-off, in’t i’,” the nostalgia of its 
Lewis-style straight pull, and being able to lift the barrel 
_off in a second (ever tried to take the barrel off of a 
‘StenP), and having a double-ended striker in case one 
breaks.... “Am I going to let the extra weight make a 
difference? It’s my crotchet, ’'m indifferent to weight, or I 
-wouldn’t have brought the girl back out, would I.” 

“I am not your responsibility.” A statue in wine-colored 
faconné velvet from neck to wrists and insteps, and how 
long, gentlemen, has she been watching from the shad- 
“ows? 

“Oh,” Pirate turning sheepish, “you are, you know.” 

“The happy couple!” Osbie roars suddenly, taking 
another pinch of nutmeg like snuff, eyeballs rolling white 
as the miniature mountain, Sneezing now loudly about the 
kitchen, it strikes him as incredible that he has both these 
people inside the same field of vision. Pirate’s face darken- 
ing with embarrassment, Katje’s unchanging, half struck 
by light from the next room, half in slate windows. 

“Should I have left you, then?” and when she only 
compresses her mouth, impatient, “or do you think some- 
one over here owed it to you to bring you out?” 

“No.” That reached her. Pirate only asked because he’s 
begun to suspect, darkly, any number of Someones Over 
Here. But to Katje a debt is for wiping out. Her old, in- 
tractable vice—she wants to cross seas, to connect coun- 
‘tries between whom there is no possible rate of exchange. 
Her ancestors sang, in Middle Dutch, 

\ 
fk ic heb u liever dan én everswin, 
wt al waert van finen goude ghewracht, 


love incommensurate with gold, golden calf, even in this 
ease golden swine. But by the middle of the 17th century 
oe were no more pigs of gold, only of flesh mortal as 
t of Frans Van der Groov, another ancestor, who went 
E to. Mauritius with a boatlead of these live hogs and lost 
een years toting his haakbus through the ebony for- 
e wandering the swamps and lava flows, systematically 


126 Gravity's Rarnpow 


killing off the native dodoes for reasons he could not ex- 
plain. The Dutch pigs took care of eggs and younger 
birds. Evans carefully drew beads on the parents at 10 or 
20 meters, the piece propped on its hook, slowly squeez- 
ing the trigger, eye focused on the molting ugliness while 
closer in the slowmatch, soaked in wine, held in the jaws 
of the serpentine, came blooming redly downward, its heat 
on his cheek like my own small luminary, he wrote home 
to Hendrik the older brother, the ruler of my Sign... un- 
covering the priming-powder he’d been keeping shielded 
with his other hand—sudden flash in the pan, through the 
touchhole, and the loud report echoing off the steep rocks, 
recoil smashing the butt up along his shoulder (the skin 
there at first raw, blistered, then callused over, after the 
first summer), And the stupid, awkward bird, never in- 
tended to fly or run at any speed—what were they good 
forP—unable now even to locate his murderer, ruptured, 
splashing blood, raucously dying... . 

At home, the brother skimmed the letters, some crisp, 
some seastained or faded, spanning years, delivered all at 
once—understanding very little of it, only anxious to spend 
the day, as usual, in the gardens and greenhouse with his 
tulips (a reigning madness of the time), especially one 
new variety named for his current mistress: blood-red, 
finely tattooed in purple. ... “Recent arrivals all carrying 
the new snaphaan... but I stick to my clumsy old match- 
lock... don’t I deserve a clumsy weapon for such a 
clumsy prey?” But Frans got no closer to telling what 
kept him out among the winter cyclones, stuffing pieces of 
old uniform down after the lead balls, sunburned, bearded 
and filthy—unless it rained or he was in the uplands 
where the craters of old volcanoes cupped rainfall blue as 
the sky in upward offering. 

He left the dodoes to rot, he couldn’t endure to eat their 
flesh. Usually, he hunted alone. But often, after months of 

it, the isolation would begin to change him, change his 
very perceptions—the jagged mountains |in full daylight. 
flaring as he watched into freak saffrons,| streaming indi- 
gos, the sky his glass house, all the island vey tulipomania, 
The voices—he insomniac, southern s too thick for 
constellations teeming in faces and creatures of fable less 
likely than the dodo—spoke the words of sleepers, singly, 


; 


Beyond the Zero 127 


coupled, in chorus. The rhythms and timbres were Dutch, 
but made no waking sense, Except that he thought they 
were warming him...scolding, angry that he couldn't 
understand. Once he sat all day staring at a single white 
dodo’s egg in a grass hummock. The place was too remote 
for any foraging pig to’ve found. He waited for scratching, 
a first crack reaching to net the chalk surface: an emer- 
‘gence. Hemp gripped in the teeth of the steel snake, ready 
to be lit, ready to descend, sun to black-powder sea, and 
destroy the infant, egg of light into egg of darkness, within 
its first minute of amazed vision, of wet down stirred cool 
by these southeast trades.... Each hour he sighted down 
the barrel. It was then, if ever, he might have seen how 
the weapon made an axis potent as Earth’s own between 
himself and this victim, still one, inside the egg, with the 
ancestral chain, not to be broken out for more than its 
‘blink of world’s light. There they were, the silent egg and 
‘the crazy Dutchman, and the hookgun that linked them 
forever, framed, brilliantly motionless as any Vermeer. 
Only the sun moved: from zenith down at last behind the 
snaggleteeth of mountains to Indian ocean, to tarry night. 
The egg, without a quiver, still unhatched, He should 
have blasted it then where it lay: he understood that the 
bird would hatch before dawn. But a cycle was finished. 
He got to his feet, knee and hip joints in agony, head 
gonging with instructions from his sleeptalkers droning by, 
‘overlapping, urgent, and only limped away, piece at right 
er arms. 

When loneliness began to drive him into situations like 
this, he often returned to a settlement and joined a hunt- 
\ing party. A drunken, university hysteria would take hold 
of them all, out on night-rampages where they'd be pres- 
ently firing at anything, treetops, clouds, leather demon 
bats screaming up beyond hearing. Tradewinds moving 

upslope to chill their nights’ sweating, sky lit half crimson 
by a volcano, rumblings under their feet as deep as the 
bats’ voices were high, all these men were caught in the 
spectrum between, trapped among frequencies of their 
own voices and words. 

This furious host were losers, impersonating a race 
Sidon by God. The colony, the venture, was dying—like 
the ebony trees they were stripping from the island, like 
my" J 
*\ 


wu 


/ 


128 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


the poor species they were removing totally from the earth. 
By 1681, Didus ineptus would be gone, by 1710 so would 
every last settler from Mauritius. The enterprise here 
would have lasted about a human lifetime. 

To some, it made sense. They saw the stumbling birds 
ill-made to the point of Satanic intervention, so ugly as to 
embody argument against a Godly creation. Was Mauritius 
some first poison trickle through the sheltering dikes of 
Earth? Christians must stem it here, or perish in a second 
Flood, loosed this time not by God but by the Enemy. 
The act of ramming home the charges into their musketry 
became for these men a devotional act, one whose sym- 
bolism they understood. 

But if they were chosén to come to Mauritius, why had 
they also been chosen to fail, and leave? Is that a choosing, 
or is it a passing-overP Are they Elect, or are they Pret- 
erite, and doomed as dodoes? 

Frans could not know that except for a few others on 
the island of Reunion, these were the only dodoes in the 
Creation, and that he was helping exterminate a race. But 
at times the scale and frenzy of the hunting did come 
through to trouble his heart. “If the species were not such 
a perversion,” he wrote, “it might be profitably husbanded 
to feed our generations. I cannot hate them quite so 
violently as do some here. But what now can mitigate 
this slaughter? It is too late.... Perhaps a more comely 
beak, fuller feathering, a capacity for flight, however brief 

details of Design. Or, had we but found savages on 
this island, the bird’s appearance might have then seemed 
to us no stranger than that of the wild turkey of North 
America, Alas, their tragedy is to be the dominant form of 
Life on Mauritius, but incapable of speech.” 

That was it, right there. No language meant no chance 
of co-opting them in to what their round and flaxen in- 
vaders were calling Salvation. But Frans, in the course of 
morning lights lonelier than most, could not keep from 
finally witnessing a miracle: a Gift of Speech ...a Con- 
version of the Dodoes. Ranked in thousands on the shore, 
with a luminous profile of reef on the water behind them, 
its roar the only sound on the morning, volcanoes at rest, 
the wind suspended, an autumn sunrise dispensing light 
glassy and deep over them all...they have come from 


Beyond the Zero 129 


their nests and rookeries, from beside the streams bursting 
out the mouths of lava tunnels, from the minor islands 
awash like debris off the north coast, from sudden water- 
falls and the wasted rain-forests where the axeblades are 
trusting and the rough flumes rot and topple in the wind, 
from their wet mornings under the shadows of mountain- 
stubs they have waddled in awkward pilgrimage to this 
assembly: to be sanctified, taken in.... For as much as 
they are the creatures of God, and have the gift of ra- 
tional discourse, acknowledging that only in His Word 
is eternal life to be found ... And there are tears of happi- 
ness in the eyes of the dodoes. They are all brothers now, 
they and the humans who used to hunt them, brothers in 
Christ, the little baby they dream now of sitting near, 
roosting in his stable, feathers at peace, watching over him 
_and his dear face all night long.... 

It is the purest form of European adventuring. What’s it 
all been for, the murdering seas, the gangrene winters and 
starving springs, our bone pursuit of the unfaithful, mid- 
nights of wrestling with the Beast, our sweat become ice 
and our tears pale flakes. of snow, if not for such mo- 
ments as this: the little converts flowing out of eye’s field, 
so meek, so trusting—how shall any craw clench in fear, 
any recreant cry be offered in the presence of our blade, 
our necessary blade? Sanctified now they will feed us, 
sanctified their remains and droppings fertilize our crops. 
Did we tell them “Salvation”? Did we mean a dwelling 
forever in the City? Everlasting lifeP An earthly paradise 
‘restored, their island as it used to be given them back? 
Probably. Thinking all the time of the little brothers num- 
bered among our own blessings. Indeed, if they save us 
from hunger in this world, then beyond, in Christ’s king- 
dom, our salvations must be, in like measure, inextricable. 
Otherwise the dodoes would be only what they appear as 
in the world’s illusory light—only our prey. God could not 
be that cruel. 

Frans can look at both versions, the miracle and the 
hunt of more years than he can remember now, as real, 
equal possibilities. In both, eventually, the dodoes die. 

‘But as for faith... he can believe only in the one steel 
reality of the firearm he carries. “He knew that a snap- 
haan would weigh less, its cock, flint, and steel give him 
my 


Rall 


~ 
ead 

oe 

" t 

: i 


130 Gravity’s Rainsow 


surer ignition—but he felt a nostalgia about the haak- 
bus...he didn’t mind the extra weight, it was his 
crotchet. ...” 

Pirate and Osbie Feel are leaning on their roof-ledge, a 
magnificent sunset across and up the winding river, the 
imperial serpent, crowds of factories, flats, parks, smoky 
spires and gables, incandescent sky casting downward 
across the miles of deep streets and roofs cluttering and 

‘sinuous river Thames a drastic stain of burnt orange to 
remind a visitor of his mortal transience here, to seal or 
empty all the doors and windows in sight to his eyes 
that look only for a bit of company, a word or two in the 
street before he goes up to the soap-heavy smell of the 
rented room and the squares of coral sunset on the floor- 
boards—an antique light, self-absorbed, fuel consumed in 
the metered winter holocaust, the more distant shapes 
among the threads or sheets of smoke now perfect ash 
ruins of themselves, nearer windows, struck a moment by 
the sun, not reflecting at all but containing the same de- 
stroying light, this intense fading in which there is no 
promise of return, light that rusts the government cars at 
the curbsides, varnishes the last faces hurrying past the 
shops in the cold as if a vast siren had finally sounded, 
light that makes chilled untraveled canals of many streets, 
and that fills with the starlings of London, converging by 
millions to hazy stone pedestals, to emptying squares and 
a great collective sleep. They flow in rings, concentric 
rings on the radar screens. The operators call them 
“angels.” ne: pepe 

“He’s haunting you,” Osbie puffing on an Amanita 
cigarette. ' 

“Yes,” Pirate ranging the edges of the roof-garden, 
irritable in the sunset, “but it’s the last thing 1 want to 
believe. The other’s been bad enough. .. .” 

“What d’you think of her, then.” <i ; | 

“Someone can use her, I think,” having decided this 
yesterday at Charing Cross Station when she left for “The 
White Visitation.” “An unforeseen dividend, for some- 
body.” atic 

“Do you know what they have in mind, down there?” 

Only that they’re brewing up something that involves 
a giant octopus, But no one up here in London knows 


a 


al ee 4 
ext 


Beyond the Zero 131 


with any precision. Even at “The White Visitation” there’s 
this sudden great coming and going, and a swampy am- 
biguity as to why. Myron Grunton is noted casting less 
than comradely looks at Roger Mexico. The Zouave has 
gone back to his unit in North Africa, back under the 
Cross of Lorraine, all that the German might find sinister 
‘in his blackness recorded on film, sweet-talked or coerced 
out of him by none less than Gerhardt von Goll, once an 
intimate and still the equal of Lang, Pabst, Lubitsch, more 
lately meshed in with the affairs of any number of exile 
governments, fluctuations in currencies, the establishment 
and disestablishment of an astonishing network of market 
operations winking on, winking off across the embattled 
continent, even as the firefights whistle steel up and down 
the streets and the firestorms sweep oxygen up in the sky 
and the customers fall smothered like bugs in the presence 
of Flit...but commerce has not taken away von Gdll’s 
Touch: these days it has grown more sensitive than ever. 
In these first rushes the black man moves about in SS 
uniform, among the lath and canvas mockups of rocket 
and Meillerwagen (always shot through pines, through 
snow, from distant angles that don’t give away the En- 
glish location), the others in plausible blackface, recruited 
for the day, the whole crew on a lark, Mr. Pointsman, 
Mexico, Edwin Treacle, and Rollo Groast, ARF’s resident 
neurosurgeon Aaron Throwster, all playing the black 
rocketeers of the fictional Schwarzkommando—even Myron 
‘Grunton in a nonspeaking role, a blurry extra like the rest 
of them. Running time of the film is three minutes, 25 
seconds and there are twelve shots. It will be antiqued, 
given a bit of fungus and ferrotyping, and transported to 
Holland, to become part of the “remains” of a counterfeit 
tocket-firing site in the Rijkswijksche Bosch, The Dutch 
resistance will then “raid” this site, making a lot of com- 
motion, faking in tire-tracks and detailing the litter of 
“gg departure. The inside of an Army lorry will be gutted 
Molotov cocktails; among ashes, charred clothing, 
Bows and slightly melted gin bottles, will be found 
fragments of carefully forged Schwarzkommando docu- 
ments, and of a reel of film, only three minutes and 25 
i of which will be viewable. Von Goll, with a 
face, proclaims it to be his greatest work. 


132 Gravity's Rainsow 


“Indeed, as things were to develop,” writes noted film 
critic Mitchell Prettyplace, “one cannot argue much with 
his estimate, though for vastly different reasons than von 
Goll might have given or even from his peculiar vantage 
foreseen.” 

At “The White Visitation,” because of erratic funding, 
there is only one film projector. Each day, about noon, 
after the Operation Black Wing people have watched their 
fraudulent African rocket troops, Webley Silvernail comes 
to carry the projector back down the chilly scuffed-wood 
corridors again to the ARF wing, in to the inner room 
where octopus Grigori oozes sullenly in his tank. In other 
rooms the dogs whine, bark shrilly in pain, whimper for a 
stimulus that does not, will never come, and the snow goes 
whirling, invisible tattooing needles against the nerveless 
window glass behind the green shades. The reel is 
threaded, the lights are switched off, Grigori’s attention is 
directed to the screen, where an image already walks. The 
camera follows as she moves deliberately nowhere long- 
legged about the rooms, an adolescent wideness and 
hunching to the shoulders, her hair not bluntly Dutch at 
all, but secured in a modish upsweep with an old, tarnished 
silver crown.... 


EB 


It was very early morning. He stumbled out alone into a 
wet brick street. Southward the barrage balloons, surf- 
riders on the combers of morning, were glowing, pink and 
pearl, in the sunrise. 
They've cut Slothrop loose again, he’s back on the 
street, shit, last chance for a Section 8 ’n’ he blew it.... 
_ Why didn’t they keep him on at that nut ward for as 
long as they said they would—wasn’t it supposed to be a 
few weeks? No explanation—just “Cheerio!” and the onion- 
skin sending him back to that ACHTUNG. The Kenosha 
Kid, and that Crouchfield the Westwardman and his side- 
kick Whappo have been all his world for these recent days 
... there were still problems to be worked out, adventures 
not yet completed, coercions and vast deals to be made on 
the order of the old woman’s arrangement for getting het 


a 
iN 


- Beyond the Zero 133 


pig home over the stile. But now, rudely, here’s that 
‘London again. 

But something’s different . . . something’s . . . been 
changed ... don’t mean to bitch, folks, but—well for in- 
stance he could almost swear he’s being followed, or 
watched anyway. Some of the tails are pretty slick, but 
others he can spot, all right. Xmas shopping yesterday at 
that Woolworth’s, he caught a certain pair of beady eyes 
in the toy section, past a heap of balso-wood fighter planes 
and little-kid-size Enfields. A hint of constancy to what 
shows up in the rearview mirror of his Humber, no color 
or model he can pin down but something always present 
inside the tiny frame, has led him to start checking out 
other cars when he goes off on a morning’s work. Things 
on his desk at ACHTUNG seem not to be where they 
were. Girls have found excuses not to keep appointments. 
He feels he’s being gently separated from the life he lived 
‘before going into St. Veronica’s. Even in movies there’s 
always someone behind him being careful not to talk, 
rattle paper, laugh too loud: Slothrop’s been to enough 
movies that he can pick up an anomaly like that right 
away. 

The cubicle near Grosvenor Square begins to feel more 
and more like a trap. He spends his time, often whole 
days, ranging the East End, breathing the rank air of 
Thameside, seeking places the followers might not follow. 

One day, just as he’s entering a narrow street all an- 
cient brick walls and lined with costermongers, he hears his 
‘name called—and hubba hubba what’s this then, here she 
comes all right, blonde hair flying in telltales, white 

-wedgies clattering on cobblestones, an adorable tomato in 
a nurse uniform, and her name’s, uh, well, oh—Darlene. 
Golly, it’s Darlene. She works at St. Veronica’s hospital, 
lives nearby at the home of a Mrs. Quoad, a lady widowed 
long ago and since suffering a series of antiquated 

es—-greensickness, tetter, kibes, purples, impost- 
humes and almonds in the ears, most recently a touch of 
Scurvy. So, out in search of limes for her landlady, the 
fruit beginning to jog and spill from her straw basket and 
roll yellowgreen back down the street, young Darlene 
comes running her nurse’s cap, her breasts soft fenders for 
this meeting on the gray city sea. 


\ 
» 
: 
> 


134 Gravity's Rainsow 


- 


“You come back! Ah Tyrone, you're back,” a tear or two, 
both of them down picking up citrus, the starch khaki 
dress rattling, even the odd sniffle from Slothrop’s not 
unsentimental nose. 

“It’s me love...” 

Tire tracks in the slush have turned to pearl, mellow 
pearl. Gulls cruise slowly against the high windowless 
brick walls of the district. 

Mrs. Quoad’s is up three dark flights, with the dome of 
faraway St. Paul’s out its kitchen window visible in the 
smoke of certain afternoons, and the lady herself tiny in a 
rose plush chair in the sitting-room by the wireless, listen- 
ing to Primo Scala’s Accordion Band. She looks healthy 
enough. On the table, though, is her crumpled chiffon 
handkerchief: feathered blots of blood in and out the con- 
volutions like a floral pattern. 

“You were here when I had that horrid quotidian ague,” 
she recalls Slothrop, “the day we brewed the wormwood 
tea,” sure enough, the very taste now, rising through his 
shoe-soles, taking him along. They’re reassembling... it 
must be outside his memory...cool clean interior, girl 
and woman, independent of his shorthand of stars «++ 80 
many fading-faced girls, windy canalsides, bed-sitters, bus- 
stop good-bys, how can he be expected to remember? but 
this room has gone on clarifying: part of whoever he was 
inside it has kindly remained, stored quiescent these 
months outside of his head, distributed through the grainy 
shadows, the grease-hazy jars of herbs, candies, spices, all 
the Compton Mackenzie novels on the shelf, glassy ambro- 
types of her late husband Austin night-dusted inside gilded 
frames up on the mantel where last time Michaelmas 
daisies greeted and razzled from a little Sévres vase she 
and Austin found together one Saturday long ago in a 
Wardour Street shop. . 

“He was my good health,” she often says. “Since he 
passed away I’ve had to become all but an outright witch, 
in pure self-defense.” From the kitchen comes the smell of 
limes freshly cut and squeezed, Darlene’s in and out of 
the room, looking for different botanicals, asking where the 
cheesecloth’s got to, “Tyrone help me just reach down 
that—no next to it, the tall jar, thank you love’—back 
into the kitchen in a creak of starch, a flash of pink. “I'm 
the only one with a memory around here,” Mrs. Quoad 


Beyond the Zero 135 


sighs. “We help each other, you see.” She brings out from 
behind its cretonne camouflage a great bowl of candles. 
“Now,” beaming at Slothrop. “Here: wine jellies. They're 
prewar.” 

“Now I remember you—the one with the graft at the 
Ministry of Supply!” but he knows, from last time, that no 
gallantry can help him now, After that visit he wrote home 

‘to Nalline: “The English are kind of weird when it comes 
to the way things taste, Mom. They aren’t like us. It 
might be the climate. They go for things we would never 
dream of. Sometimes it is enough to tur your stomach, 
boy. The other day I had one of these things they call 
‘wine jellies.” That’s their idea of candy, Mom! Figure 
out a way to feed some to that Hitler ’n’ I betcha the 
war'd be over tomorrow!” Now once again he finds him- 
self checking out these ruddy gelatin objects, nodding, he 
hopes amiably, at Mrs. Quoad. They have the names of 
different wines within on them in bas-relief. 

“Just a touch of menthol too,” Mrs. Quoad popping one 
into her mouth. “Delicious.” 

Slothrop finally chooses one that says Lafitte Rothschild 
and stuffs it on into his kisser. “Oh yeah. Yeah. Mmm. It’s 
great.” 

“If you really want something peculiar try the Bernkast- 
ler Doktor. Oh! Aren’t you the one who brought me those 
lovely American slimy elm things, maple-tasting with a 
touch of sassafras—” 

“Slippery elm. Jeepers I’m sorry, I ran out yesterday.” 

Darlene comes in with a steaming pot and three cups on 
a tray. “What’s that?” Slothrop a little quickly, here. 

“You don’t really want to know, Tyrone.” 

“Quite right,” after the first sip, wishing she’d used 
more lime juice or something to kill the basic taste, which 
is ghastly-bitter. These people are really insane. No sugar, 
natch. He reaches in the candy bowl, comes up with a 
black, ribbed licorice drop. It looks safe. But just as he’s 
biting in, Darlene gives him, and it, a peculiar look, great 
timing this girl, sez, “Oh, I thought we got rid of all 
those—” a blithe, Gilbert & Sullivan ingenue’s thewse— 

"8 ago,” at which point Slothrop is encountering this 
dribbling liquid center, which tastes like mayonnaise and 
orange peels. 
“You've taken the last of my Marmalade Surprises!” 


136 Gravity's RAInBow 


cries Mrs. Quoad, having now with conjuror’s speed pro- 
duced an egg-shaped confection of pastel green, studded all 
over with lavender nonpareils. “Just for that I shan’t let you 
have any of these marvelous rhubarb creams.” Into her 
mouth it goes, the whole thing. 

“Serves me right,” Slothrop, wondering just what he 
means by this, sipping herb tea to remove the taste of the 
mayonnaise candy—oops but that’s a mistake, right, here’s 
his mouth filling once again with horrible alkaloid desola- 
tion, all the way back to the soft palate where it digs in, 
Darlene, pure Nightingale compassion, is handing him a 
hard red candy, molded like a stylized raspberry... mm, 
which oddly enough even tastes like a raspberry, though 
it can’t begin to take away that bitterness. Impatiently, he 
bites into it, and in the act knows, fucking idiot, he’s been 
had once more, there comes pouring out onto his tongue 
the most godawful crystalline concentration of Jeez it 
must be pure nitric acid, “Oh mercy that’s really sour,” 
hardly able to get the words out he’s so puckered up, 
exactly the sort of thing Hop Harrigan used to pull to get 
Tank Tinker to quit playing his ocarina, a shabby trick 
then and twice as reprehensible coming from an old lady 
who’s supposed to be one of our Allies, shit: he can’t even 
see it’s up his nose and whatever it is won't dissolve, just 
goes on torturing his shriveling tongue and crunches like 
ground glass among his molars. Mrs. Quoad is meantime 
busy savoring, bite by dainty bite, a cherry-quinine petit 
four. She beams at the young people across the candy 
bowl. Slothrop, forgetting, reaches again for his tea. There 
is no graceful way out of this now. Darlene has brought a 
couple-three more candy jars down off the shelf, and now 
he goes plunging, like a joumey to the center of some 
small, hostile planet, into an enormous bonbon chomp 
through the mantle of chocolate to a strongly eucalyptus- 
flavored fondant, finally into a core of some very tough 
grape gum arabic. He fingemails a piece of this out from 
between his teeth and stares at it for a while. It is purple 
in color. 

“Now you're getting the ideal” Mrs. Quoad waving at 
him a marbled conglomerate of ginger root, butterscotch, 
and aniseed, “you see, you also have to enjoy the way i 
looks. Why are Americans so impulsive?” (sae 


: 


a) 


Beyond the Zero 137 


“Well,” mumbling, “usually we don’t get any more com- 
plicated ‘than Hershey bars, see. 

' “Oh, try this,” hollers Darlene, ‘clutching her throat and 
swaying against him. 

“Gosh, it must really be something,” doubtfully taking 
this nasty-looking brownish novelty, an exact quarter-scale 
replica of a Mills-type hand grenade, lever, pin and every- 
thing, one of a series of patriotic candies put out before 
sugar was quite so scarce, also including, he notices, peer- 
ing into the jar, a .455 Webley cartridge of green and pink 
striped taffy, a six-ton earthquake bomb of some silver- 
flecked blue gelatin, and a licorice bazooka. 

“Go on then,” Darlene actually taking his hand with the 
candy in it and trying to shove it into his mouth. 

“Was just, you know, looking at it, the way Mrs. Quoad 
suggested.” 

_ “And no fair squeezing it, Tyrone.” 

Under its tamarind glaze, the Mills bomb out to be 
luscious pepsin-flavored nougat, chock-full of tangy can- 
died cubeb berries, and a chewy camphor-gum center. It 
is unspeakably awful. Slothrop’s head begins to reel with 
camphor fumes, his eyes are running, his tongue’s a hope- 
less holocaust. Cubeb? He used to smoke that stuff. “Poi- 
soned ...” he is able to croak. 

“Show a little backbone,” advises Mrs. Quoad. 

“Yes,” Darlene through tongue-softened sheets of cara- 
mel, “don’t you know there’s a war on? Here now love, 
‘open your mouth.” 
| Through the tears he can’t see it too well, but he can 
hear Mrs. Quoad across the table going “Yum, yum, yum,” 
and Darlene giggling. It is enormous and soft, like a 
marshmallow, but somehow—unless something is now 
going seriously wrong with his brain—it tastes like gin. 
“Wha’s ’is,” he inquires thickly. 

“A gin marshmallow,” sez Mrs. Quoad. 

“Awww...” 

“Oh that’s nothing, have one of these—” his teeth, in 
some perverse reflex, crunching now through a hard sour 
Qooseberry shell into a wet spurting unpleasantness of, he 
hopes it’s tapioca, little glutinous chunks of something all 
Saturated with powdered cloves. 


ua 


¥ 


4 i 


138 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


“More tea?” Darlene suggests. Slothrop is coughing 
violently, having inhaled some of that clove filling. 

“Nasty cough,” Mrs. Quoad offering a tin of that least 
believable of English coughdrops, the Meggezone. “Dar- 
lene, the tea is lovely, I can feel my scurvy going away, 
really I can.” 

The Meggezone is like being belted in the head with a 
Swiss Alp. Menthol icicles immediately begin to grow from 
the roof of Slothrop’s mouth. Polar bears seek toenail-holds 
up the freezing frosty-grape alveolar clusters in his lungs. 
It hurts his teeth too much to breathe, even through his 
nose, even, necktie loosened, with his nose down inside 
the neck of his olive-drab T-shirt, Benzoin vapors seep 
into his brain. His head floats in a halo of ice. 

Even an hour later, the Meggezone still lingers, a mint 
ghost in the air. Slothrop lies with Darlene, the Disgusting 
- English Candy Drill a thing of the past, his groin now 

against her warm bottom. The one candy he did not get 
to taste—one Mrs. Quoad withheld—was the Fire of 
Paradise, that famous confection of high price and pro- 
tean taste—“salted plum” to one, “artificial cherry” to 
another .. . “sugared violets” . . . “Worcestershire sauce” 

.. “spiced treacle”... any number of like descriptions, 
positive, terse—never exceeding two words in length—re- 
sembling the descriptions of poison and debilitating gases 
found in training manuals, “sweet-and-sour eggplant” be- 
ing perhaps the lengthiest to date. The Fire of Paradise 
‘today is operationally extinct, and in 1945 can hardly be 
found: certainly nowhere among the sunlit shops and 
polished windows of Bond Street or waste Belgravia. But 
every now and then one will surface, in places which deal 
usually other merchandise than sweets: at rest, back in- 
side big glass jars clouded by the days, along with objects 
like itself, sometimes only one candy to a whole jar, nearly 
hidden in the ambient tourmalines in German gold, carved 

ebony finger-stalls from the last century, pegs, valve-pieces, 
threaded hardware from obscure musical instruments, elec- 
tronic components of resin and copper that the War, in its 
glutton, ever-nibbling intake, has not yet found and licked 
back into its darkness. ... Places where the motors never 
come close enough to be loud, and there are trees outside 
along the street. Inner rooms and older faces developing 


Beyond the Zero 139 


under light falling through a skylight, yellower, later in 
the year.... 

Hunting across the zero between waking and sleep, his 
halfway limp cock still inside her, their strengthless legs 
bent the same angle... The bedroom deepens into water 
and coolness. Somewhere the sun is going down. Just 
enough light to see the darker freckles on her back. In the 
parlor Mrs. Quoad is dreaming she’s back in the gardens 
at Bournemouth, among the rhododendrons, and a sudden 
rain, Austin crying Touch her throat, Majesty. Touch! and 
Yrj6—a pretender but the true king, for a very doubtful 
branch of the family usurped the throne in 1878 during 
the intrigues over Bessarabia—Yrj6 in an old-fashioned 
frock coat with golden galloons shining at the sleeves, 
bending toward her in the rain to cure her forever of 
King’s Evil, looking exactly as he does in the rotogravure, 
his lovely Hrisoula a step or two behind kindly, seriously 
waiting, around them the rain thundering down, the King’s 
white ungloved hand bending like a butterfly to touch the 
hollow of Mrs. Quoad’s throat, the miracle touch, gently 
+» touch... 

The lightning— 

And Slothrop is yawning “What time is it?” and Dar- 
lene is swimming up from. sleep. When, with no warning, 
the room is full of noon, blinding white, every hair flowing 
up from her nape clear as day, as the concussion drives in 
on them, rattling the building to its poor bones, beating 
in the windowshade, gone all to white and black lattice of 
mourning-cards. Overhead, catching up, the rocket’s rush 
comes swelling, elevated express down, away into ringing 
silence. Outside glass has been breaking, long, dissonant 
cymbals up the street. The floor has twitched like a shaken 
carpet, and the bed with it. Slothrop’s penis has sprung 
erect, aching. To Darlene, suddenly awake, heart pound- 
ing fast, palms and fingers in fear’s pain, this hardon has 
seemed reasonably part of the white light, the loud blast. 
By the time the explosion has died to red strong flickering 
on the shade, she’s begun to wonder... about the two 
together... but they're fucking now, and what does it 
matter, but God’s sake why shouldn't this stupid Blitz be 
good for something? 

. And who’s that, through the crack in the orange shade, 


7 


~ 


a 


140 Gravity's RAINBow 


breathing carefully? Watching? And where, keepers of 
maps, specialists at surveillance, would you say the next 
one will fall? 


O 


The very first touch: he’d been saying something mean, a 
bit of the usual Mexico self-reproach—ah you don’t know 
me I’m really a bastard sort of thing—“No,” she’ went to 
put her fingers to his lips, “don’t say that....” As she 
reached, without thinking he grabbed her waist, moved 
her hand away, pure defense—but kept holding her, by 
the wrist. They were eyes-to-eyes, and neither would look 
away. Roger brought her hand to his lips and kissed it 
then, still watching her eyes. A pause, his heart in sharp 
knocks against the front of his chest...“Ohh...” the 
sound rushing out of her, and she came in to hug him, 
completely let-go, open, shivering as they held each other. 
She told him later that as soon as he took her wrist that 
night, she came. And the first time he touched her cunt, 
squeezed Jessica’s soft cunt through her knickers, the 
trembling began again high in her thighs, growing, taking 
her over. She came twice before cock was ever officially 
put inside cunt, and this is important to both of them 
though neither has figured out why, exactly. 

Whenever it happens, though, the light always gets very 
red for them. 

Once they met at a cashes? she was wearing a red 
sweater with short sleeves, and her bare arms glowed red 
by her sides. She hadn’t any make-up on, the first time 
he’d seen her so. Walking to the car, she takes his hand 
and puts it, for a moment, lightly between her moving 
‘legs. Roger’s heart grows erect, and comes, That’s really 
how it feels. Up sharply to skin level in a V around his 
centerline, washing over his nipples...it is love, it is 
amazing. Even when she isn’t there, after a dream, at a 
face in the street that might against eh be Jessica's, 
Roger can never control it, he’s in its gr. 

About Beaver, or Jeremy, as he is known to his mother, 
Roger tries not to think any more than he has to, Of course 
he agonizes over technical matters. She cannot possibly—_ 


Beyond the Zero 141 


can she?—be Doing The Same Things with Jeremy. Does 
Jeremy ever kiss her cunt, for example? Could that prig 
actually—does she reach around as they're fucking a-and 
slide a mischievous finger, his English rose, into Jeremy’s 
asshole? Stop, stop this (but does she suck his cock? Has 
‘he ever had his habitually insolent face between her lovely 
buttocks?) no use, it’s youthful folly time here and you're 
better of up at the Tivoli watching Maria Montez and 
Jon Hall, or looking for leopards or peccaries in Regents 
/Park Zoo, and wondering if it'll rain before 4:30. 

_ The time Roger and Jessica have spent together, totaled 
up, still only comes to hours. And all their spoken words 
to less than one average SHAEF memorandum. And there 
is no way, first time in his career, that the statistician can 
make these figures mean anything. 

Together they are a long skin interface, flowing sweat, 
‘close-as muscles and bones can press, hardly a word be- 
-yond her name, or his. 

Apart is for all their flip flim-dialogue, scenarios they 
make up to play alone for themselves in the nights with 
the Bofors door-knocking against her sky, with his wind 
humming among the loops of barbed wire down along the 
beach. The Mayfair Hotel. “We are quite the jet-propelled 
one aren’t we, only half an hour late.” 

“Well,” Wrens and NAAFI girls, jeweled young widows 
side-glancing on by, “I’m sure you've put the time to good 
us e.” 
__ “Time enough for several assignations,” he replies, look- 
ing elaborately at his watch, worn WW II style‘on the 
inside of his wrist, “and by now, I should say, a con- 
firmed pregnancy or two, if not indeed— 

“Ah,” she blithely jumps (but upward, not on), “that 
reminds me... 

__ “Yaaahhh!” Roger reeling back to a potted plant, among 
the lilting saxophones of Roland Peachey and his Orchestra 
playing “There, I Said It Again,’ and cowering. 

“So, that’s on your mind. If mind is the word I want.” 

_ They-confuse everyone. They look so innocent. People 
immediately want to protect them: censoring themselves 
‘away from talk of death, business, duplicity when Roger 

Jessica are there. It’s all shortages, pongs and boy 
friends, films and blouses... 


dS 
af 


ie 


142 Gravity’s Ramsow 


With her hair pulled back of her ears, her soft chin in 
profile, she looks only g or 10, alone by windows, blinking 
into the sun, turning her head on the light counterpane, 
coming in tears, child’s reddening wrinkling face about to 
cry, going oh, oh... 

One night in the dark quilt-and-cold refuge of their 
bed, drowsing to and fro himself, he licked Jessica to 
sleep. When she felt his first warm breaths touch her labia, 
she shivered and cried like a cat. Two or three notes, it 
seemed, that sounded together, hoarse, haunted, blowing 
with snowflakes remembered from around nightfall. Trees 
outside sifting the wind, out of her sight the lorries for- 
ever rushing down the streets and roads, behind houses, 
across canals or river, beyond the simple park. Oh and 
the dogs and cats who went padding in the fine snow.... 


“,.. pictures, well scenes, keep flashing in, Roger. By 
themselves, I mean I’m not making them....” A bright 
swarm of them is passing by, against the low isotonic 
glimmer of the ceiling. He and she lie and breathe 
mouth-up. His soft cock drools down around his thigh, the 
downhill one, closest to Jessica. The night room heaves a 
sigh, yes Heaves, a Sigh—old-fashioned comical room, oh 
me I’m hopeless, born a joker never change, flirting away 
through the mirrorframe in something green-striped, panta- 
looned, and ruffled—meantime though, it is quaint, most 
rooms today hum you know, have been known also to 
“breathe,” yes even wait in hushed expectancy and that 
ought to be the rather sinister tradition here, long slender 
creatures, heavy perfume and capes in rooms assailed by 
midnight, pierced with spiral stairways, blue-petaled per- 
golas, an ambience in which no one, however provoked or 
out of touch, my dear young lady, ever, Heaves, a Sigh. 
It is not done. 

But here. Oh, this young lady. Checked gingham. Rag- 
ged eyebrows, grown wild. Red velvet. On a dare once, 
she took off her blouse, motoring up on the trunk road 
near Lower Beeding. 

“My God she’s gone insane, what is this, why do they 
all come to me?” 

“Well, ha, ha,” Jessica twirling the petite of her ard 
blouse like a stripper, “you uh, said I was afraid to. Din 


Beyond the Zero 143 


you. Called me ‘cowardly, cowardly custard’ or something, 
*s I recall—” No brassiere of course, she never wears one. 

“Look here,” glaring sideways, “do you know you can 
get arrested? Never mind you,” just occurring to him, 
here, “I'll get arrested!” 

“They'll blame it all on you, la, la.” Lower teeth edging 
out in a mean-girl’s smile. “I’m just an innocent lamb and 
this—” flinging a little arm out, striking light from the fair 
hairs on her forearm, her small breasts bouncing free, “this 
Roger-the-rake! here, this awful beast! makes me perform, 
these degrading...” 

Meantime, the most gigantic lorry Roger has ever seen 
in his life has manoeuvred steel-shuddering nearby, and 
now not only the driver, but also several—well, what ap- 
pear to be horrid... midgets, in strange operetta uni- 
forms actually, some sort of Central European government- 
in-exile, all of them crammed somehow into the high-set 
cab, all are staring down, scuffling like piglets on a sow 
for position, eyes popping, swarthy, mouths leaking spit, to 
take in the spectacle of his Jesicca Swanlake scandalously 
bare-breasted and himself desperately looking to slow 
down. and drop behind the lorry—except that now, behind 
Roger, pressing him on, in fact, at a speed identical with 
the lorry’s, has appeared, oh shit it is; a military police 
car. He can’t slow down, and if he speeds up, they'll really 
get suspicious. ... 

“Uh, Jessie, please get dressed, um, would you love?” 
Making a show of looking for his comb which is, as usual, 
lost, suspect is known as a notorious ctenophile.. . 

The driver of the huge, loud lorry now tries to get 
Roger’s attention, the other midgets crowding at the win- 
dows calling, “Hey! Hey!” and emitting oily, guttural 
laughs. Their leader speaks English with some liquid, un- 
speakably nasty European accent, Lot of winking and 
nudging up there now, too: “Meester! Ay, zhu! Wet a 
meeneh’, eh?” More laughter. Roger in the rearview mirror 
sees English cop-faces pink with rectitude, red insignia 
leaning, bobbing, consulting, turning sharply now and 
then to stare ahead at the couple in the Jaguar who're 
acting so—“What are they doing, Eagbnns can you make 
* out?” 


+ + 3 as ~~ ; i f b 
144 Gravity’s Rainsow 


“Appears to be a man and a woman, sir.” a 

“Ass.” And it’s out with the black binoculars. 

Through rain,..then through dreaming glass, green 
with the evening. And herself in a chair, old-fashioned 
bonneted, looking west over the deck of Earth, inferno 
red at its edges, and further in the brown and gold 
clouds. ... 

Then, suddenly, night: The empty rocking chair lit 
sharing chalk blue by—is it the moon, or some other light 
from the sky? just the hard chair, empty now, in the very 
clear night, and this cold light coming down. ... 

The images go, flowering, in and out, some lovely, some 
just awful... but she’s snuggled in here with her lamb, 
her Roger, and how she loves the line of his neck all at 
once so—why there it is right there, the back of his 
bumpy head like a boy of ten’s. She kisses him up and 
down the sour salt reach of skin that’s taken her so, taken 
her nightlit along this high tendoning, kisses him as if 
kisses were flowing breath itself, and never ending, 


One morning—he had not seen her for about a fort- 
night—he woke in his hermit’s cell at “The White Visita- 
tion” with a hardon, scratchy eyelids and a long pale 
brown hair tangled in his mouth. It wasn’t one of his own 
hairs. It wasn’t anybody’s he could think of but Jessica’s. 
But it couldn’t be—he hadn’t seen her. He sniffed a couple 
of times, then sneezed. Morning developed out the win- 
dow. His right canine ached. He unreeled the long hair, 
beaded with saliva, tooth-tartar, mouth-breather’s morning 
fur, and stared at it. How'd it get hereP Eerie, dearie. A 
bit of the je ne sais quoi de sinistre, all right. He had to 
piss. Shuffling to the lavatory, his graying government flan- 
nel tucked limply inside the cord of his pajamas, it came to 
him: what if it’s some mauve turn-of-the-century tale of 
ghostly revenge and this hair here’s some First Step... 
Oh, paranoia? You should’ve seen him going through all 
the combinations as he moved around doing lavatory 
things among the stumbling, farting, razor-soraping, hack- 
ing, sneezing and snot-crusted inmates of Psi/Section. Only _ 
later in this did he even begin to think of Jessica—of her 
safety. Thoughtful Roger. What if, if she’d died in the 


Beyond the Zero  - 145 


night, an accident at the magazines... with this hair the 
only good-by her ghostly love had been able to push back 
through to this side, to the only one who'd ever mattered. 
...Some spider-statistician: his eyes had actually filled 
- with tears before the Next Idea—oh. Oboy. Turn off that 
faucet, Dorset, and get hep to this. He stood, half-stooped, 
over the washbasin, paralyzed, putting his worry. for 
Jessica on Hold for a bit, wanting very much to look back 
over his shoulder, even into the, the old mirror, you know, 
see what they're up to, but too frozen to risk even that... 
now ...oh yes a most superb possibility has found seedbed 
in-his brain, and here it is. What if they are all, all these 
Psi Section freaks here, ganged up on him in secret? 
O.K.? Yes: suppose they can see into your mind! a-and how 
about—what if it’s hypnotism? Eh? Jesus: then a whole 
number of other occult things such as: astral projection; 
brain control (nothing occult about that), secret curses for 
impotence, boils, madness, yaaahhh—vpotions! (as he 
straightens at last and back in his mind’s eyes to his office 
now glances, very gingerly, at the coffee mess, oh 
God...), psychic-unity-with-the-Controlling-Agency such 
that Roger would be he and he Roger, yes yes a number 
of these notions rambling through his mind here, none of 
them really pleasant, either—especially inside this staff 
latrine, with Gavin Trefoil’s face this morning colored 
bright magenta, a clover blossom flashing in the wind, 
Ronald Cherrycoke hawking fine-marbled amber phlegm 
into the basin—what’s all this, who are all these people.... 
Freaks! Freeeeaks! He’s surrounded! they’ve been out there 
_ night and day all the war. long tapping his brain, telepaths, 
witches, Satanic operators of all descriptions tuning in on 
everything—even when he and Jessica are in bed fuck- 
Try to hold it down old man, panic if you must but 
later, not here.... Faint washroom light bulbs deepen 
the thousands of old clustered water and soap spots on the 
mirrors to an interfeathering of clouds, of skin and smoke 
as he swings his head past, lemon and beige, oilsmoke 
black and twilight brown in here, very loosely crumbled, 
that’s the texture.... 
_. Lovely morning, World War Two. All he can keep in 
: front of his mind are the words I want a transfer, kind of 


146 Gravity's RAINBOW 


humming tunelessly at the mirror, yes sir got to put in a 
chit right away. I'll volunteer for duty in Germany’s what 
Til do. Dum de dum, de dum. Right, there was an ad only 
Wednesday in the classified section of Nazis in the News, 
sandwiched between a Merseyside Labour branch that was 
looking for a publicist, and a London advertising agency 
with positions open immediately on demob, they said. This 
ad in the middle was placed by some arm of the G-5-to-be, 
trying to round up a few “re-education” experts. Vital, vital 
stuff. Teach the German Beast about the Magna’ Carta, 
sportsmanship, that sort of thing, eh? Out inside the works 
of some neurotic Bavarian cuckoo clock of a village, were- 
elves streaking in out of the forests at night to leave sub- 
versive handbills at door and window—“Anything!” Roger 
groping back to his narrow quarters, “anything at all’s 
better than this... .” 

That’s how bad it was. He knew he’d feel more at home 
in mad Germany with the Enemy than here in Psi Section. 
The time of year makes it even worse. Christmas. 
Bwweeeaaaagghh, clutching to his stomach. Jessica was all 
that made it human or tolerable. Jessica... 

He was taken over then, for half a minute, shivering and 
yawning in his long underwear, soft, nearly invisible in the 
December-dawn enclosure, among so many sharp edges of 
books, sheafs and flimsies, charts and maps (and the chief 
one, red pockmarks on the pure white skin of lady Lon- 
don, watching over all... wait... disease on skin .. . does 
. she carry the fatal infection inside herself? are the sites 
predestined, and does the flight of the rocket actually fol- 
low from the fated eruption latent in the city... but he 
can’t hold it, no more than he understands Pointsman’s 
obsession with the reversal of sound stimuli and please, 
please can’t we just drop it for a bit...), visited, not 
knowing till it passed how clearly he was seeing the honest 
half of his life that Jessica was now, how fanatically his 
mother the War must disapprove of her beauty, her cheeky 
indifference to death-institutions he’d not so long ago be- 
lieved in—her unflappable hope (though she hated to 
make plans), her exile from childhood (though she re- 
fused ever to hold on to memories).... | 

His life had been tied to the past. He’d seen himself a 
point on a moving wavefront, propagating through sterile 


Beyond the Zero 147 


_ history—a known past, a projectable future. But Jessica 
was the breaking of the wave. Suddenly there was a beach, 

_ the unpredictable... new life. Past and future stopped at 
the beach: that was how he’d set it out. But he wanted to 

believe it too, the same way he loved her, past all words—. 
believe that no matter how bad the time, nothing was 
fixed, everything could be changed and she could always 
deny the dark sea at his back, love it away. And (selfishly) 
that from a somber youth, squarely founded on Death— 
along for Death’s ride—he might, with her, find his way 

, to life and to joy. He’d never told her, he avoided telling 
himself, but that was the measure of his faith, as this 
seventh Christmas of the War came wheeling in another 
charge at his skinny, shivering flank. ... 


She trips fussing about the dormitory, bothering other 
girls for puffs off of stale Woodbines, nylon-repair kits, 
sparrow-bright war-wisecracks passing for sympathy. To- 
night shell be with Jeremy, her lieutenant, but she wants 

_ to be with Roger. Except that, really, she doesn’t. Does 
_ she? She can’t remember ever being so confused. When 
she’s with Roger it’s all love, but at any distance—any at 
all, Jack—she finds that he depresses and even frightens 
her. Why? On top of him in the wild nights riding up and 
down his cock her axis, trying herself to stay rigid enough 
not to turn to cream taper-wax and fall away melting to 
the coverlet coming there’s only room for Roger, Roger, oh 
love to the end of breath. But out of bed, walking talking, 
his bitterness, his darkness, run deeper than the War, the 
winter: he hates England so, hates “the System,” gripes 
endlessly, says hell migrate when the War's over, stays 
inside his paper cynic’s cave hating himself... and does 
she want to bring him out, really? Isn’t it safer with 
_ Jeremy? She tries not to allow this question in too often, 
_ but it’s there. Three years with Jeremy. They might as well 
_be married. Three years ought to count for something. 
Daily, small stitches and easings. She’s worn old Beaver’s 
_ bathrobes, brewed his tea and coffee, sought his eye across 
-parks, day rooms and rainy mud fields when all the 
lay’s mean, dismal losses could be rescued in the one 
look—familiar, full of trust, in a season when the word is 
nvoked for quaintness or a minor laugh. And to rip it all 


148 GRAVITY’S Rainsow 


out? three years? for this erratic, self-centered—boy, really. 
Weepers, he’s supposed to be past thirty, he’s years older 
than she. He ought to’ve learned something, surely? A 
man of experience? 

The worst of it’s that she has no one to talk to. The 
politics of this mixed battery, the professional incest, the 
unwholesome. obsessions with who said what to whom in 
the spring of 1942 for God’s sake, outside of Grafty Green, 
Kent, or someplace, and who ought to have answered what 
but didn’t but told someone else instead thus provoking 
hatreds that have thrived wonderfully down to the present 
day—six years of slander, ambition and hysteria make 
confiding anything to anyone around here an act of pur 
masochism. - 

“Girl in distress, Jess?” Maggie Dunkirk on the way by, 
smoothing her gauntlets. On the Tannoy a BBC swing 
band is blaring hotly syncopated Christmas music. 

“Got a fag, Mag?” pretty automatic by now, you guess, 
Jess? 

Well— “Thought it looked somewhat like a bloody 
Garbo film around here, not at all the usual nicotine 
starvation, sorry wrong again, ta-ta....” 
Oh be on your way. “Thinking about me Xmas shop- 

“What're you getting the Beaver then.” 

Concentrating on gartering her nylons, the older pair, 
up-in-front-down-in-back mnemonically stirring in wafts 
among her fingers, laundry-white puckered elastic being 
stretched fine and tangent now to the gentle front curve 
of her thigh, suspender-clips glittering silver under or be- 
hind her lacquered red fingernails, passing like distant 
fountains behind red topiary trees, Jessica replies, “Oh. 
Mm. A Pipe, I suppose... .” , ' 


Near her battery one night, driving Somewhere in Kent, 
Roger and Jessica came upon a church, a hummock in the 
dark upland, lamplit, growing out of the earth. It was 
Sunday evening, and shortly before vespers. Men in great- 
coats, in oilskins, in dark berets they slipped off at the 
entrance, American fliers in leather lined with sheep's 
wool, a few women in clinking boots and wide-shou 
swagger coats, but no children, not a child in sight, just 


Beyond the Zero 149 


grownups, trudging in from their bomber fields, balloon- 
bivouacs, pillboxes over the beach, through the Norman 
doorway shaggy with wintering vines. Jessica said, “Oh, I 
remember...” but didn’t go on. She was remembering 
other Advents, and hedges snowy as sheep from her win- 
dow, and the Star ready to be pasted up on the sky again. 

Roger pulled over, and they watched the scuffed and 
dun military going in to evensong. The wind smelled of 
fresh snow. 

“We ought to be home,” she said, after a bit, “it’s late.” 

“We could just pop in here for a moment.” 

Well, that surprised her, but def, after weeks of his snide 
comments? His unbeliever’s annoynance with the others in 
Psi Section he thought were out to drive him dotty as they 
were, and his Scroogery growing as shopping days till 
Xmas dwindled—“You're not supposed to be the sort,” 
she told him. But she did want to go in, nostalgia was 
heavy in tonight’s snow-sky, her own voice ready to betray 
her and run to join the- waits whose carols we’re so apt to 
hear now in the distances, these days of Advent dropping 
one by one, voices piping across frozen downs where the 
sown mines crowd thick as plums in a pudding... often 
above sounds of melting snow, winds that must blow not 
through Christmas air but through the substance of time 
would bring her those child-voices, singing for sixpences, 
and if her heart wasn’t ready to take on quite all the 
stresses of her mortality and theirs, at least there was the 
fear that she was beginning to lose them—that one winter 
she would go running to look, out to the gate to find them, 
run as far as the trees but in vain, their voices fading.... 

They walked through the tracks of all the others in the 
snow, she gravely on his arm, wind blowing her hair to 
snarls, heels slipping once on ice. “To hear the music,” he 
explained. 

Tonight’s scratch choir was all male, epauletted shoul- 
ders visible under the wide necks of the white robes, and 
many faces nearly as white with the exhaustion of soaked 
and muddy fields, midwatches, cables strummed by the 
nervous balloons sunfishing in the clouds, tents whose lights 

inside shone nuclear at twilight, soullike, through the 
cross-hatched walls, turning canvas to fine gauze, while 
the wind drummed there. Yet there was one black face, the 


150 Gravity’s RAInBow 


counter-tenor, a Jamaican corporal, taken from his warm 
island to this—from singing his childhood along the rum- 
smoky saloons of High Holborn Street where the sailors 
throw mammoth red firecrackers, quarter of a stick of 
dynamite man, over the swinging doors and run across the 
street giggling, or come walking out with high-skirted girls, 
girls of the island, Chinese and French girls... lemon 
peels crushed in the gutters of the streets scented the early 
mornings where he used to sing, O have you seen my 
darlin’ Lola, with a shape like a bottle of Coca-Cola, 
sailors running up and down in the brown shadows of 
alleys, flapping at neckerchief and pants-leg, and the girls 
whispering together and laughing...each moming he 
counted out half a pocket full of coins of all nations. From 
palmy Kingston, the intricate needs of the Anglo-American 
Empire (1939-1945) had brought him to this cold field- 
mouse church, nearly in earshot of a northern sea hed 
hardly glimpsed in crossing, to a compline service, a pro- 
gram tonight of plainsong in English, forays now and then 
into polyphony: Thomas Tallis, Henry Purcell, even a 
German macaronic from the fifteenth century, attributed to 
Heinrich Suso: 


In dulct jubilo 

Nun singet und seid frohl 
Unsers Herzens Wonne 
Leit in praesipio, 
Leuchtet vor die Sonne 
Maitris in gremio. 

Alpha es et O. 


With the high voice of the black man riding above the 
others, no head falsetto here but complete, out of the 
honest breast, a baritone voice brought over years of wood- 
shedding up to this range... he was bringing brown girls 
to sashay among these nervous Protestants, down the an- 
cient paths the music had set, Big and Little Anita, Stiletto 
May, Plongette who loves it between her tits and will do 
it that way for free—not to mention the Latin, the Ger- 
man? in an English church? These are not heresies so 
much as imperial outcomes, necessary as the black man’s 
presence, from acts of minor surrealism—which, taken in 
the mass, are an act of suicide, but which in its pathology, 


Beyond the Zero 151 


in its dreamless version of the real, the Empire commits 


by the thousands every day, completely unaware of what 
it’s doing... . So the pure counter-tenor voice was soaring, 
finding its way in to buoy Jessica’s heart and even Roger’s 
she guessed, risking glances at his face sideways and up 


| through brown ghosts of her hair, during recitatives or 


releases. He wasn’t looking nihilistic, not even cheaply so. 
He was... 

No, Jessica’s never seen his face exactly like this, in the 
light of a few hanging oil lamps, the flames unguttering 
and very yellow, on the nearest the verger’s two long 
fingerprints in fine, pollen V-for-victory up around the belly 
of the glass, Roger’s skin more child-pink, his eyes more 
glowing than the lamplight alone can account for—isn’t it? 
or is that how she wants it to be? The church is as cold as 
the night outside. There’s the smell of damp wool, of bit- 
ter on the breaths of these professionals, of candle smoke 


and melting wax, of smothered farting, of hair tonic, of 


the burning oil itself, folding the other odors in a maternal 
way, more closely belonging to Earth, to deep strata, other 
times, and listen... listen: this is the War’s evensong, the 
War’s canonical hour, and the night is real. Black great- 
coats crowd together, empty hoods full of dense, church- 
interior shadows. Over on the coast the Wrens work late, 
down inside cold and gutted shells, their blue torches are 
newborn stars in the tidal evening. Hullplates swing in the 
sky, like great iron leaves, on cables that creak in splinters 
of sound. At ease, on standby, the flames of the torches, 
softened, fill the round glass faces of the gauges with apri- 
cot light. In the pipefitters’ sheds, icicled, rattling when 


the gales are in the Straits, here’s thousands of old used 


toothpaste tubes, heaped often to the ceilings, thousands 
of somber man-mornings made tolerable, transformed to 
mint fumes and bleak song that left white spots across the 


_ quicksilver mirrors from Harrow to Gravesend, thousands 


of children who pestled foam up out of soft mortars of 
mouths, who lost easily a thousand times as many words 


among the chalky bubbles—bed-going complaints, timid 


_ 


announcements of love, news of fat or translucent, fuzzy or 


gentle beings from the country under the counterpane— 
uncounted soapy-liquorice moments spat and flushed down 


_ to sewers and the slow-scumming gray estuary, the morn- 


4 


a 


152 Gravity’s RaInsow 


ing mouths growing with the day tobacco and fish-furred, 
dry with fear, foul with idleness, flooded at thoughts of 
impossible meals, settling instead for the week’s offal in 
gland pies, Household Milk, broken biscuits at half the 
usual points, and isn’t menthol a marvelous-invention to 
take just enough of it away each moming, down to be- 
come dusty oversize bubbles tessellating tough and stag- 
nant among the tar shorelines, the intricate draftsmanship 
of outlets feeding, multiplying out to sea, as one by one 
these old toothpaste tubes are emptied and retumed to 
the War, heaps of dimly fragrant metal, phantoms of 
peppermint in the winter shacks, each tube wrinkled or 
embossed by the unconscious hands of London, written 
over in interference-patterns, hand against hand, waiting 
now—it is true return—to be melted for solder, for plate, 
alloyed for castings, bearings, gasketry, hidden smokeshriek 
linings the children of that other domestic incarnation will 
never see. Yet the continuity, flesh to kindred metals, home 
to hedgeless sea, has persisted. It is not death that sepa- 
rates these incarnations, but paper: paper specialties, paper 
routines. The War, the Empire, will expedite such barriers 
between our lives. The War needs to divide this way, and 
to subdivide, though its propaganda will always stress 
unity, alliance, pulling together. The War does not appear 
to want a folk-consciousness, not even of the sort the 
Germans have engineered, ein Volk ein Fiihrer—it wants a 
machine of many separate parts, not oneness, but a com- 
plexity.... Yet who can presume to say what the War 
wants, so vast and aloof is it...so absentee. Perhaps the 
War isn’t even an awareness—not a life at all, really. 
There may only be some cruel, accidental resemblance to 
life. At “The White Visitation” there’s a long-time schiz, 
you know, who believes that he is World War II. He gets 
no newspapers, refuses to listen to the wireless, but still, 
the day of the Normandy invasion somehow his tempera- 
ture shot up to 104°. Now, as the pincers east and west 
continue their slow reflex contraction, he speaks of dark- 
ness invading his mind, of an attrition of, self.... The 
Rundstedt offensive perked him up though, gave him a 
new lease on life—“A beautiful Christmas gift,” he con- 
fessed to the resident on his ward, “it’s the season of birth, 
of fresh beginnings.” Whenever the rockets fall—those 


Beyond the Zero 153 


- which are audible—he smiles, turns out to pace the ward, 

tears about to splash from the corners of his merry eyes, 
caught up in a ruddy high tonicity that can’t help cheering 

_ his fellow patients. His days are numbered. He’s to die on 

_V-E Day. If he’s not in fact the War then he’s its child- 
surrogate, living high for a certain term but come the 
ceremonial day, look out. The true king only dies a mock 
death. Remember. Any number of young men may be 
‘selected to die in his place while the real king, foxy old 
bastard, goes on. Will he show up under the Star, slyly 

, genuflecting with the other kings as this winter solstice 
draws on us? Bring to the serai gifts of tungsten, cordite, 
high-octane? Will the child gaze up from his ground of 
golden straw then, gaze into the eyes of the old king who 
bends long and unfurling overhead, leans to proffer his 

gift, will the eyes meet, and what message, what possible 
greeting or entente will flow between the king and the 
infant prince? Is the baby smiling, or is it just gasP Which 
do you want it to be? 

Advent blows from the sea, which at sunset tonight 
shone green and smooth as iron-rich glass: blows daily 
upon us, all the sky above pregnant with saints and slender 
heralds’ trumpets. Another year of wedding dresses aban- 
doned in the heart of winter, never called for, hanging in 
quiet satin ranks now, their white-crumpled veils begun 
to yellow, rippling slightly only at your passing, spectator 
... visitor to the city at all the dead ends.... Glimpsing 

in the gowns your own reflection once or twice, halfway 
- from shadow, only blurred flesh-colors across the peau de 
soie, urging you in to where you can smell the mildew’s 
first horrible touch; which was really the idea—covering 
all trace of her own smell, middleclass bride-to-be perspir- 
ing, genteel soap and powder, But virgin in her heart, in 
her hopes. None of your bright-Swiss or crystalline season 
here, but darkly billowed in the day with cloud and the 
snow falling like gowns in the country, gowns of the win- 
ter, gentle at night, a nearly windless breathing around 
you. In the stations of the city the prisoners are back from 
_ Indo-China, wandering their poor visible bones, light as 
_ dreamers or men on the moon, among chrome-sprung 
prams of black hide resonant as drumheads, blonde wood 
__ high-chairs pink and blue with scraped and mush-spattered 


154 Gravity's RAINBOW 


floral decals, folding-cots and bears with red felt tongues, 
baby-blankets making bright pastel clouds in the coal and 
stream smells, the metal spaces, among the queued, the 
drifting, the warily asleep, come by their hundreds in for 
the holidays, despite the warnings, the gravity of Mr. 
Morrison, the tube under the river a German rocket may 
pierce now, even now as the words are set down, the 
absences that may be waiting them, the city addresses that 
surely can no longer exist. The eyes from Burma, from 
Tonkin, watch these women at their hundred persever- 
ances—stare out of blued orbits, through headaches no 
Alasils can ease. Italian P/Ws curse underneath the mail 
sacks that are puffing, echo-making in now each hour, in 
seasonal swell, clogging the snowy trainloads like mush- 
rooms, as if the trains have been all night underground, 
passing through the country of the dead. If these Eyeties 
sing now and then you can bet it’s not “Giovinezza” but 
something probably from Rigoletto or La Bohéme—indeed 
the Post Office is considering issuing a list of Nonaccept- 
able Songs, with ukulele chords as an aid to ready identi- 
fication. Their cheer and songfulness, this lot, is genuine 
up to a point—but as the days pile up, as this orgy of 
Christmas greeting grows daily beyond healthy limits, with 
no containment in sight before Boxing Day, they settle, 
themselves, for being more professionally Italian, rolling 
the odd eye at the lady evacuees, finding techniques of 
balancing the sack with one hand whilst the other goes 
playing “dead”—cioé, conditionally alive—where the 
crowds thicken most feminine, directionless... well, most 
promising. Life has to go on. Both kinds of prisoner recog- 
nize that, but there’s no mano morto for the Englishmen 
back from CBI, no leap from dead to living at mere per- 
mission from a likely haunch or thigh—no play, for God’s 
sake, about life-and-death! They want no more adventures: 
only the old dutch fussing over the old stove or warming 
the old: bed, cricketers in the wintertime, they want the 
semi-detached Sunday dead-leaf sommolence of a dried 
garden. If the brave new world should also come about, a 
kind of windfall, why there’ll be time to adjust certainly to 
that.... But they want the nearly aie luxury this 
week of buying an electric train set for the kid, trying 
that way each to light his own set of sleek little faces here, 


Beyond the Zero 155 


calibrating his strangeness, well-known ‘photographs all, 


brought to life now, oohs and aahs but not yet, not here 
in the station, any of the moves most necessary: the War 
has shunted them, earthed them, those heedless destroying 


_ signalings of love. The children have unfolded last year’s 


' toys and found reincarnated Spam tins, they’re. hep this 


may be the other and, who knows, unavoidable side to the 
Christmas game. In the months between—country springs 
and summers—they played with real Spam tins—tanks, 
tank-destroyers, pillboxes, dreadnoughts deploying meat- 
pink, yellow and blue about the dusty floors of lumber- 
rooms or butteries, under the cots or couches of their exile. 
Now it’s time again. The plaster baby, the oxen frosted 
with gold leaf and the human-eyed sheep are turning real 
again, paint quickens to flesh. To believe is not a price 
they pay—it happens all by itself. He is the New Baby. 
On the magic night before, the animals will talk, and the 
sky will be milk. The grandparents, who’ve waited each 
week for the Radio Doctor asking, What Are Piles? What 
Is Emphysema? What Is A Heart Attack? will wait up 
beyond insomnia, watching again for the yearly impossible 
not to occur, but with some mean residue—this is the hill- 
side, the sky can show us a light—like a thrill, a good time 
you wanted too much, not a complete loss but still too far 
short of a miracle... keeping their sweatered and shawled 
vigils, theatrically bitter, but with the residue inside going 
through a new winter fermentation every year, each time a 
bit less, but always good for a revival at this season. 
... All but naked now, the shiny suits and gowns of their 
pubcrawling primes long torn to strips for lagging the hot- 
water pipes and heaters of landlords, strangers, for hold- 
ing the houses’ identities against the winter. The War 
needs coal. They have taken the next-to-last steps, at- 
tended the Radio Doctor's certifications of what they 
knew in their bodies, and at Christmas they are naked as 
geese under this woolen, murky, cheap old-people’s swad- 
dling. Their electric clocks run fast, even Big Ben will be 
fast now until the new spring’s run in, all fast, and no one 
else seems to understand or to care. The War needs elec- 
tricity. It’s a lively game, Electric Monopoly, among the 


__ power companies, the Central Electricity Board, and other 


War agencies, to keep Grid Time synchronized with 


156 Gravity’s RAINBOW | 


Greenwich Mean Time. In the night, the deepest con- 
crete wells of night, dynamos whose locations are classified 
spin faster, and so, responding, the clock-hands next to all 
the old, sleepless eyes—gathering in their minutes whining, 
pitching higher toward the vertigo of a siren. It is the 
Night’s Mad Camival. There is merriment under the shad- 
ows of the minute-hands. Hysteria in the pale faces be- 
tween the numerals. The power companies speak of loads, 
war-drains so vast the clocks will slow again unless this 
nighttime march is stolen, but the loads expected daily do 
net occur, and the Grid runs inching ever faster, and the 
old faces turn to the clock faces, thinking plot, and the 
numbers go whirling toward the Nativity, a violence, a 
nova of heart that will turn us all, change us forever to 
the very forgotten roots of who we are. But over the sea 
the fog tonight still is quietly scalloped pearl. Up in the 
city the arc-lamps crackle, furious, in smothered blaze up 
the centerlines of the streets, too ice-colored for candles, 
to chill-dropleted for holocaust . . . the tall read busses sway, 
all the headlamps by regulation newly unmasked now 
parry, cross, traverse and blind, torn great fistfuls of wet- 
ness blow by, desolate as the beaches beneath the nacre 
fog, whose barbed wire that never knew the inward stidg 
of current, that only lay passive, oxidizing in the night, 
now weaves like underwater grass, looped, bitter cold, 
sharp as the scorpion, all the printless sand miles past 
cruisers abandoned in the last summers of peacetime that 
once holidayed the old world away, wine and olive-grove 
and pipe-smoke evenings away the other side of the War, 
stripped now to rust axles and brackets and smelling in- 
side of the same brine as this beach you cannot really 
walk, because of the War. Up across the downs, past the 
spotlights where the migrant birds in autumn choked the 
beams night after night, fatally held till they dropped ex- 
hausted out of the sky, a shower of dead birds, the com- 
pline worshipers sit in the unheated church, shivering, 
voiceless as the choir asks: where are the joys? "Where else 
but there where the Angels sing new songs and the bells 
ring out in the court of the King. Beste thousand- 
year sigh—eia, wirn wir da! were we but 

tired men and their black bellwether reaching as far as 
they can, as far from their sheeps’ clothing as the year will 


i 


~ 


Beyond the Zero 157 


let them stray. Come then. Leave your war awhile, paper 
or iron war, petrol or flesh, come in with your love, your 
fear of losing, your exhaustion with it. All day it’s been at 
you, coercing, jiving, claiming your belief in so much that 


_ isn’t true. Is that who you are, that vaguely criminal face 
‘on your ID card, its soul snatched by the government 


camera as the guillotine shutter fell—or maybe just left 
behind with your heart, at the Stage Door Canteen, where 
they're counting the night’s take, the NAAFI girls, the 
girls named Eileen, carefully sorting into refrigerated com- 
partments the rubbery maroon organs with their yellow 
garnishes of fat—oh Linda come here feel this one, put 
your finger down in the ventricle here, isn’t it swoony, it’s 


still going. ... Everybody you don’t suspect is in on this, 


everybody but you: the chaplain, the doctor, your mother 
hoping to hang that Gold Star, the vapid soprano last 
night on the Home Service programme, let’s not forget 


_ Mr. Noel Coward so stylish and cute about death and the 


1 


afterlife, packing them into the Duchess for the fourth year 
running, the lads in Hollywood telling us how grand it all 
is over here, how much fun, Walt Disney causing Dumbo 
the elephant to clutch to that feather like how many 
carcasses under the snow tonight among the white-painted 
tanks, how many hands each frozen around a Miraculous 
Medal, lucky piece of wom bone, half-dollar with the 
grinning sun peering up under Liberty’s wispy gown, 
clutching, dumb, when the 88 fell—what do you think, 
it’s a children’s story? There aren’t any. The children are 
away dreaming, but the Empire has no place for dreams 
and it’s Adults Only in here tonight, here in this refuge 
with the lamps burning deep, in pre-Cambrian exhala- 
tion, savory as food cooking, heavy as soot. And 60 miles 
up the rockets hanging the measureless instant over the 
black North Sea before the fall, ever faster, to orange 
heat, Christmas star, in helpless plunge to Earth. Lower 
in the sky the flying bombs are out too, roaring like the 
Adversary, seeking whom they may devour. It’s a long 
walk home tonight. Listen to this mock-angel singing, let 
your communion be at least in listening, even if they are 
not spokesmen for your exact hopes, your exact, darkest 
terror, listen. There must have been evensong here long 
before the news of Christ. Surely for as long as there have 


4 


158 Gravity's Ramnsow 


been nights bad as this one—something to raise the possi- 
bility of another night that could actually, with love and 
cockcrows, light the path home, banish the Adversary, 
destroy the boundaries between our lands, our bodies, our 
stories, all false, about who we are: for the one night, 
leaving only the clear way home and the memory of the 
infant you saw, almost too frail, there’s too much shit in 
these streets, camels and other beasts stir heavily outside, 
each hoof a chance to wipe him out, make him only an- 
other Messiah, and sure somebody’s around already taking 
bets on that one, while here in this town the Jewish 
collaborators are selling useful gossip to Imperial Intelli- 
gence, and the local hookers are keeping the foreskinned 
invaders happy, charging whatever the traffic will bear, 
just like the innkeepers who're naturally delighted with 
this registration thing, and up in the capital they’re won- 
dering should they, maybe, give everybody a number, 
yeah, something to help SPQR Record-keeping... and 
Herod or Hitler, fellas (the chaplains out in the Bulge are 
manly, haggard, hard drinkers), what kind of a world is 
it (“You forgot Roosevelt, padre,” come the voices from 
the back, the good father can never see them, they harass 
him, these tempters, even into his dreams: “Wendell 
Willkie!” “How about Churchill?” “’Arry Pollitt!”) for a 
baby to come in tippin’ those Toledos at 7 pounds 8 ounces 
thinkin’ he’s gonna redeem it, why, he oughta have his 
head examined. ... 

But on the way home tonight, you wish you'd picked 
him up, held him a bit. Just held him, very close to your 
heart, his cheek by the hollow of your shoulder, full of 
sleep. As if it were you who could, somehow, save him. 
For the moment not caring who you're supposed to be 
registered as. For the moment anyway, no longer who the 
Caesars say you are. 


O Jesu parvule, 
Nach dir ist mir so weh... | 


So this pickup group, these exiles and horny kids, sullen 
civilians called up in their middle age, men fattening 
despite their hunger, flatulent because of it, pre-ulcerous, 
hoarse, runny-nosed, red-eyed, sore-throated, piss-swollen 


id 


- » Beyond the Zero 159 


men suffering from acute lower backs and all-day hang- 
overs, wishing death on officers they truly hate, men you 
have seen on foot and smileless in the cities but forgot, 
men who don’t remember you either, knowing they ought 
to be grabbing a little sleep, not out here performing for 
strangers, give you this evensong, climaxing now with its 
rising fragment of some ancient scale, voices overlapping 
three- and fourfold, up, echoing, filling the entire hollow 
of the church—no counterfeit baby, no announcement of 
the Kingdom, not even a try at warming or lighting this 

terrible night, only, damn us, our scruffy obligatory little 
cry, our maximum reach outward—praise be to God/—for 
you to take back to your war-address, your war-identity, 
across the snow’s footprints and tire tracks finally to the 
path you must create by yourself, alone in the dark. 
Whether you want it or not, whatever seas you have 
‘crossed, the way home.... 


O 


Paradoxical phase, when weak stimuli get strong re- 
sponses. ... When did it happen? A certain early stage of 
sleep: you had not heard the Mosquitoes and Lancasters 
tonight on route to Germany, their engines battering apart 
the sky, shaking and ripping it, for a-full hour, a few puffs 
of winter cloud drifting below the steel-riveted underside 
of the night, vibrating with the constancy, the terror, of so 
many bombers outward bound. Your own form immobile, 
mouth-breathing, alone face-up on the narrow cot next to 
the wall so pictureless, chartless, mapless: so habitually 
blank. ... Your feet pointed toward a high slit window at 
the far end of the room. Starlight, the steady sound of the 
bombers’ departure, icy air seeping in. The table littered 
with broken-spined books, scribbled columns headed 
Time / Stimulus / Secretion (30 sec) / Remarks, teacups, 
saucers, pencils, pens. You slept, you dreamed: thousands 
of feet above your face the steel bombers passed, wave 
after wave. It was indoors, some great place of assembly. 
Many people were gathered. In recent days, at certain 
hours, a round white light, quite intense, has gone sliding 
along and down in a straight line through the air. Here, 


“ 


eee” - oe ee 
LS am “a tee 

2 >. 
160 Gravity's Ramsow ; 


suddenly, it appears again, its course linear as always, right 
to left. But this time it isn’t constant—instead it lights up 


time, is taken by those present as a warning—something 
wrong, drastically wrong, with the day.... No one knew 


The assembly adjourns. On seeing the light jangling this 
way, you begin to wait for something terrible—not exactly 
an air raid but something close to that. You look quickly 
over at a clock. It’s six on the dot, hands perfectly straight 
up and down, and you understand that six is the hour of 


the 

over by ancient walnut trees, a hill, a wooden fence, hol- © 
low-eyed horses in a field, a cemetery.... Your task, in 
these dreams, is often to cross—under the trees, through 


something happens. 
into the fallow field just below the graveyard, full’ of 
autumn brambles and rabbits, where the gypsies live. 
Sometimes you fly. But you can never rise above a certain 
height. You may feel yourself being slowed, coming im- 


an 
interdiction, from which there is no appeal... and as the 
But this evening, this six o’clock of the round light, you — 
have set out leftward instead. With you is a girl identified 


Beyond the Zero 161 


something is going to happen, and you can only wait. The 
landscape shines. Wetness on the pavement. Settling a 
warm kind of hood around the back of your neck and 
shoulders, you are about to remark to your wife, “This is 
the most sinister time of evening.” But there’s a better 
word than “sinister.” You search for it. It is someone's 
name. It waits behind the twilight, the clarity, the white 
flowers. There comes a light tapping at the door. 

You sat bolt upright in bed, your heart pounding in 
fright. You waited for it to repeat, and became aware of 
the many bombers in the sky. Another knock. It was 
Thomas Gwenhidwy, come down all the way from Lon- 
don, with the news about poor Spectro. You slept through 
the loud squadrons roaring without letup, but Gwenhidwy’s 
small, reluctant tap woke you. Something like what hap- 
pens on the cortex of Dog during the “paradoxical” phase. 


Now ghosts crowd beneath the eaves. Stretched among 
snowy soot chimneys, booming over air-shafts, too tenuous 
themselves for sound, dry now forever in this wet gusting, 
stretched and never breaking, whipped in glassy French- 
curved chase across the rooftops, along the silver downs, 
skimming where the sea combs freezing in to shore. They 
gather, thicker as the days pass, English ghosts, so many 
jostling in the nights, memories unloosening into the win- 
ter, seeds that will never take hold, so lost, now only an 
every-so-often word, a clue for the living—“Foxes,” calls 
Spectrog across astral spaces, the word intended for Mr. 
Pointsman who is not present, who won’t be told because 
the few Psi Section who’re there to hear it get cryptic debris 
of this sort every sitting—if recorded at all it finds its way 
into Milton Gloaming’s word-counting project—‘“Foxes,” a 
buzzing echo on the afternoon, Carroll Eventyr, “The 
White Visitation” ’s resident medium, curls thickly tight- 
ened across his head, speaking the word “Foxes,” out of 
very red, thin lips... half of St. Veronica’s hospital in the 
morning smashed roofless as the old Ick Regis Abbey, 

_ powdered as the snow, and poor Spectro picked off, lighted 
cubbyhole and dark ward subsumed in the blast and he 
never hearing the approach, the sound too late, after the 

_ blast, the rocket’s ghost calling to ghosts it newly made. 

; Then silence, Another “event” for Roger Mexico, a round- 


4 


162 Gravity’s Rainsow 


headed pin to be stuck in his map, a square graduating 
from two up to three hits, helping fill out the threes pre- 
diction, which lately’s being lagged behind. ... 

A pin? not even that, a pinhole in paper that someday 
will be taken down, when the rockets have stopped their 
falling, or when the young statistician chooses to end his 
count, paper to be hauled away by the charwomen, tom 
up, burned. ... Pointsman alone, sneezing helplessly in 
his dimming bureau, the barking from the kennels flat now 
and diminished by the cold, shaking his head no... in- 
side me, in my memory... more than an “event”... our 
common mortality ... these tragic days. ... But by now he 
is shivering, allowing himself to stare across his office space 
at the Book, to remind himself that of an original. seven 
there are now only two left, himself and Thomas Gwen- 
hidwy tending his poor out past Stepney: The five ghosts 
are strung in clear escalation: Pumm in a jeep accident, 
Easterling taken early in a raid by the Luftwaffe, Dromond 
by German artillery on Shellfire Corner, Lamplighter by a 
flying bomb, and now Kevin Spectro... auto, bomb, gun, 
V-1, and now V-2, and Pointsman has no sense but terror’s, 
all his skin aching, for the mounting sophistication of this, 
for the dialectic it seems to imply. . .. 

“Ah, yes indeed. The mummy’s curse, you idiot. Christ, 
Christ, I’m ready for D Wing.” 

Now D. Wing is “The White Visitation” ’s cover, still 
housing a few genuine patients. Few of the PISCES peo- 
ple go near it, The skeleton of regular hospital staff have 
their own canteen, W.C.s, sleeping quarters, offices, carry- 
ing on as under the old place, suffering the Other Lot in 
their midst. Just as, for their part, PISCES staff suffer the 
garden or peacetime madness of D Wing, only rarely 
finding opportunity to swap information on therapies or 
symptoms. Yes, one would expect more of a link. Hysteria . 
is, after all, is it not, hysteria. Well, no, come to find out, 
it's not. How does one feel legitimist and easy for very 
long about the transition? From conspiracies so mild, so 
domestic, from the serpent coiled in the teacup, the hand’s 
paralysis or eye’s withdrawal at words, words that could 
frighten that much, to the sort of thing Spectro found 
_ every day in his ward, extinguished now...to what 
Pointsman finds in Dogs Piotr, Natasha, Nikolai, Sergei, 


Beyond the Zero 163 


Katinka—or Pavel Sergevich, Varvara Nikolaevna, and 
then ther children, and— When it can be read so clearly 
in the faces of the physicians... Gwenhidwy inside his 
fluffy beard never as impassive as he might have wished, 
Spectro hurrying away with a syringe for his Fox, when 
nothing can really stop the Abreaction of the Lord of the 
Night unless the Blitz stops, rockets dismantle, the entire 
film runs backward: faired skin back to sheet steel back to 
pigs to white incandesence to ore, to Earth. But the reality 
is not reversible. Each firebloom, followed by blast then 
by sound of arrival, is a mockery (how can it not be 
deliberate?) of the reversible process: with each one the 
Lord further legitimizes his State, and we who cannot find 
him, even to see, come to think of death no more often, - 
really, than before...and, with no warning when they 
will come, and no way to bring them down, pretend to 
carry on as in Blitzless times. When it does happen, we 
are content to call it “chance.” Or we have been per- 
suaded. There do exist levels where chance is hardly recog- 
nized at all. But to the likes of employees such as Roger 
Mexico it is music, not without its majesty, this power 
m2 m? m1 

series Ne (1 + m + ‘op + 3 tases fad) ’ 
terms numbered according to rocketfalls per square, the 
Poisson dispensation ruling not only these annihilations no 
man can run from, but also cavalry accidents, blood 
counts, radioactive decay, number of wars per year.... 


Pointsman stands by a window, his own vaguely re- 
flected face blown through with the driven snow outside 
in the darkening day. Far across the downs cries a train 
whistle, grainy as late fog: a cockcrow — * — °* a 
long whistle, another crow, fire at trackside, a rocket, 
another rocket, in the woods or valley... 

Well . . . Why noé renounce the Book then Ned, give it 
up that’s all, the obsolescent data, the Master's isolated 

“moments of poetry, it’s paper that’s all, you don’t need it, 
the Book and its terrible curse... before it’s too late.... 

Yes, recant, grovel, oh fabulous—but before whom? Who's 

listening? But he has crossed back to the desk and actually 

“laid hands on it.... 

_ “Ass. Superstitious ass.” Wandering, empty-headed... 


fe 

.] 

i. 
% 


Bina 


164 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


these episodes are coming more often now. His decline, 
creeping on him like the cold. Pumm, Easterling, Dro- 
mond, Lamplighter, Spectro... what should he’ve done 
then, gone down to Psi Section, asked Eventyr to get up a 
séance, try to get on to one of them at least...perhaps... 
yes... What holds him back? “Have I,” he whispers 
against the glass, the aspirate, the later plosives clouding 
the cold pane in fans of breath, warm and disconsolate 
breath, “so much pride?” One cannot, he cannot walk 
down that particular corridor, cannot even suggest; no not 
even to Mexico, how he misses them... though he hardly 
knew. Dromond, or Easterling... but...misses Allen 
Lamplighter, who would bet on anything, you know, on 
dogs, thunderstorms, tram numbers, on street-comer wind 
and a likely skirt, on how far a given doodle would get, 
perhaps...oh God... even the one that fell on him.... 
Pumm’s arranger-style piano and drunken baritone, his 
adventuring among the nurses.... Spectro... Why cant 
he askP When there are a hundred ways to put it.... 

I should... should have. ... There are, in his history, 
so many of these unmade moves, so many “should haves”— 
should have married her, let her father steer him, should 
have stayed in Harley Street, been kinder, smiled more at 
strangers, even smiled back this afternoon at Maudie 
Chilkes... why couldn’t he? A silly bleeding smile, why 
not, what inhibits, what snarl of the mosaic? Pretty, amber 
eyes behind those government spectacles... Women avoid 
him. He knows in a general way what it is: he’s creepy. 
He’s even aware, usually, of the times when he’s being 
creepy—it’s a certain set to his face-muscles, a tendency 
to sweat... but he can’t seem to do anything about it, 
can’t ever concentrate for long enough, they distract him 
so—and next thing he knows he’s back to radiating the 
old creepiness again... and their response to it is predict- 
able, they run uttering screams only they, and he, can 
hear, Oh but how he’d like someday to. give them some- 
thing really to scream about. . 

Here’s an erection stirring, he'll ee himself to 
sleep again tonight. A joyless constant, an institution in his 
life. But goading him, just before the bright peak, what 
images will come whirling inP Why, the turrets and blue 
waters, the sails and churchtops of Stage toe yellow 


Beyond the Zero 165 


telegram, the face of a tall, cognizant, and beautiful 
woman turned to watch him as he passes in the ceremonial 
limousine, a woman who will later, hardly by chance, visit 
him in his suite at the Grand Hotel... it’s not all ruby 
nipples and black lace cami-knickers, you know. There are 
hushed entrances into rooms that smell of paper, satellite 
votes on this Committee or that, the Chairs, the Prizes... 
what could compare! Later, when you're older, you'll know, 
they said. Yes and it grows upon him, each war year equal 
to a dozen of peacetime, oh my, how right they were. 

As his luck has always known, his subcortical, brute 
luck, this gift of survival while other and better men are 
snatched away into Death, here’s the door, one he’s 
imagined so often in lonely Thesean brushings down his 
polished corridors of years: an exit out of the orthodox- 
Pavlovian, showing him vistas of Norrmalm, Sédermalm, 
Deer Park and Old City.... 

One by one they are being picked off around him: in his 
small circle of colleagues the ratio slowly grows top-heavy, 
more ghosts, more each winter, and fewer living... and 
with each one, he thinks he feels patterns on his cortex 
going dark, settling to sleep forever, parts of whoever he’s 
been now losing all definition, reverting to dumb chem- 
Kevin Spectro did not differentiate as much as he be- 
tween Outside and Inside. He saw the cortex as an inter- 
face organ, mediating between the two, but part of them 
both. “When you've looked at how it really is,” he asked 
once, “how can we, any of us, be separate?” He is my 
Pierre Janet, Pointsman thought. ... 

Soon, by the dialectic of the Book, Pointsman will be 
alone, in a black field lapsing to isotropy, to the zero, wait- 
ing to be last to go.... Will there be time? He has to 
survive . .. to try for the Prize, not for his own glory, no— 
but to keep a promise, to the human field of seven he 
once was, the ones who didn’t make it.... Here’s a 
medium shot, himself backlit, alone at the high window in 
the Grand Hotel, whisky glass tipped at the bright sub- 
arctic sky and here’s to you then, chaps, it'll be all of us 
up there onstage tomorrow, Ned Pointsman only happened 
to survive that’s all ...t0 stockHoim his banner and cry, 
and after Stockholm a blur, a long golden twilight.... 


Y 


—e 


es 


166 Gravity’s RAINBOW - 


Oh yes once you know, he did believe in a Minotaur 
waiting for him: used-to dream himself rushing into the 
last room, burnished sword at the ready, screaming like 
a Commando, letting it all out at last—some true marvel- 
ous peaking of life inside him for the first and last time, 
as the face turned his way, ancient, weary, seeing none of 
Pointsman’s humanity, ready only to assume him in another 
long-routinized nudge of horn, flip of hoof (but this time 
there would be struggle, Minotaur blood the fucking beast, 
cries from far inside himself whose manliness and violence 
surprise him).... This was the dream. The settings, the 
face changed, little of it past the structure survived the 
first cup of coffee and flat beige Benzedrine pill. It might 
be a vast lorry-park just at dawn, the pavement newly 
hosed, mottled in grease-browns, the hooded olive trucks 
standing each with a secret, each waiting... but he knows 
that inside one of these...and at last, sifting among 
them, finds it, the identifying code beyond voicing, climbs 
up into the back, under the canvas, waits in the dust and 
brown light, until through the cloudy oblong of the cab 
window a face, a face he knows begins to turn... but the 
underlying structure is the turning face, the meeting of 
eyes...stalking Reichssieger von Thanatz Alpdrucken, 
that most elusive of Nazi hounds, champion Weimaraner 
for 1941, bearing studbook number 416832 tattooed inside 
his ear along through a Londonized Germany, his liver- 
gray shape receding, loping at twilit canalsides strewn 
with debris of war, rocket blasts each time missing them, 
their chase preserved, a plate etched in firebursts, the map 
of a sacrificial city, of a cortex human and canine, the 
dog’s ear-leather mildly aswing, top of his skull brightly 
reflecting the winter clouds, into a shelter lying steel-clad - 
miles below the city, an opera of Balkan intrigue, in whose 
hermetic safety, among whose clusters of blue dissonance 
unperiodically stressed he’s unable to escape completely 
because of how always the Reichssieger persists, leading, 
_ serene, uncancelable, and to the literal pursuit of whom he 
thus returns, must return time and again ina fever-rondo, 
until at last they are on some hillside at the end of a long 
afternoon of dispatches from Armageddon, ‘among scarlet 
bangs of bougainvillea, golden pathways where dust is 
rising, pillars of smoke far. away over the spidery city 


Beyond the Zero 167 


they’ve crossed, voices in the air telling of South America 
burned to cinders, the sky over New York glowing purple 
with the new all-sovereign death-ray, and here at last is 
where the gray dog can turn and the amber eyes gaze into 
Ned Pointsman’s own.... 

Each time, each turning, his own blood and heart are 
stroked, beaten, brought jubilantly high, and triggered to 
the icy noctiluca, to flare and fusing Thermite as he begins 
to expand, an uncontainable light, as the walls of the 
chamber turn a blood glow, orange, then white and begin 
to slip, to flow like wax, what there is of labyrinth collaps- 
ing in rings outward, hero and horror, engineer and 
Ariadne consumed, molten inside the light of himself, the 
mad exploding of himself... . 

Years ago. Dreams he hardly remembers. The inter- 
mediaries come long since between himself and his final 
beast. They would deny him even the little perversity of 
being in love with his death... . 

But now with Slothrop in it—sudden angel, thermo- 
dynamic surprise, whatever he is... will it change now? 
ae Pointsman get to have a go at the Minotaur after 

P 

Slothrop ought to be on the Riviera by now, warm, fed, 
well-fucked. But out in this late English winter the dogs, 
thrown over, are still ranging the back-streets and mews, 
sniffing the dustbins, skidding on carpets of snow, fighting, 
fleeing, shivering in their wet pools of Prussian blue... 
seeking to avoid what cannot be smelled or seen, what 
announces itself with the roar of a predator so absolute 
they sink to the snow whining and roll over to give it 
their soft and open bellies... . 

Has Pointsman renounced them in favor of one untried 
human subject? Don’t think he hasn’t doubts as to the 
validity of this scheme, at least. Let Vicar de la Nuit worry 
about its “rightness,” he’s the staff chaplain. But... what 
about the dogs? Pointsman knows them. He’s deftly picked 
the locks of their awareness. They have no secrets. He can 
drive them mad, and with bromides in adequate doses he 

ean bring them back. But Slothrop.. . 

__ So the Pavlovian dithers about his office, feeling restless 
and old. He should sleep but he can’t. It has to be more 
than the simple conditioning of a child, once upon a time. 


Ls 
‘te 


a 


168 Gravity's Ramnsow 


How can he’ve been a doctor this long and not developed 
reflexes for certain conditions? He knows better: he knows 
it is more. Spectro is dead, and Slothrop (sentiments - 
demprise, old man, softly now) was with his Darlene, 
only a few blocks from St. Veronica’s, two days before. 

When one event happens after another with this awful 
regularity, of course you don’t automatically assume that 
it’s cause-and-effect. But you do look for some mechanism 
to make sense of it. You probe, you design a modest ex- 
periment.... He owes Spectro that much. Even if the 
American’s not legally a murderer, he is sick. The etiology 
ought to be traced, the treatment found. 

There is to this enterprise, Pointsman knows, a danger 
of seduction. Because of the symmetry. ... He’s been led 
before, you know, down the garden path by symmetry: in 
certain test results... in assuming that a mechanism must 
imply its mirror image—“irradiation,” for example and 
“reciprocal induction”... and who'd ever said that either 
had to exist? Perhaps it will be so this time, too. But how 
it haunts him, the symmetry of these two secret weapons, 
Outside, out in the Blitz, the sounds of V-1 and V-2, one 
the reverse of the other.... Pavlov showed how mirror- 
images Inside could be confused. Ideas of the opposite. 
But what new pathology lies Outside now? What sickness 
- to events—to History itselfi—can create symmetrical op- 
posites like these robot weapons? - * 

Sign and symptoms. Was Spectro right? Could Outside 
and Inside be part of the same field? If only in fairness... 
in fairness... Pointsman ought to be seeking the answer 
at the interface . . . oughtn’t he . . . on the cortex of 
Lieutenant Slothrop. The man will suffer—perhaps, in 
some clinical way, be destroyed—but how many others 
tonight are suffering in his nameP For pity’s sake, every 
day in Whitehall they’re weighing and taking risks that 
make his, in this, seem almost trivial. Almost. There’s 
something here, too transparent and swift to get a hold 
on—Psi Section might speak of ectoplasms—+but he knows 
that the time has never been better, and that the exact 
experimental subject is in his hands, He must seize now, or 
be doomed to the same stone hallways, whose termination 
he knows. But he must remain open—even to the possi- 
bility that the Psi people are right. “We may all be right,” 


Beyond the Zero 169 


he puts in his journal tonight, “so may be all we have 
speculated, and more. Whatever we may find, there can 
be no doubt that he is, physiologically, historically, a 
monster. We must never lose control. The thought of him 
lost in the world of men, after the war, fills me with a 
deep dread I cannot extinguish. ...” 


O 


More and more, these days of angelic visit and com- 
muniqué, Carroll Eventyr feels a victim of his freak talent. 
As Nora Dodson-Truck once called it, his “splendid weak- 
ness.” It showed late in life: he was 35 when out of the 
other world, one morning on the Embankment, between 
strokes of a pavement artist’s two pastels, salmon darken- 
ing to fawn, and a score of lank human figures, rag- 
sorrowful in the distances interlacing with ironwork and 
river smoke, all at once someone was speaking through 
Eventyr, so quietly that Nora caught hardly any of it, not 
even the identity of the soul that took and used him. Not 
then. Some of it was in German, some of the words she 
remembered. She would ask her husband, whom she was 
to meet that afternoon out in Surrey—arriving late though, 
all the shadows, men and women, dogs, chimneys, very 
long and black across the enormous lawn, and she with a 
dusting of ocher, barely noticeable in the late sun, making 
a fan shape near the edge of her veil—it was that color 
she'd snatched from the screever’s wood box and swiftly, 
turning smoothly, touching only at shoe tip and the 
creamy block of yellow crumbling onto the surface, never 
leaving it, drew a great five-pointed star on the pavement, 
just upriver from an unfriendly likeness of Lloyd George 
in heliotrope and sea-green: pulling Eventyr by the hand 
to stand inside the central pentagon, seagulls in a wailing 
diadem overhead, then stepping in herself, an instinctive, 
a motherly way, her way with anyone she loved. She'd 
drawn her pentagram not even half in play. One couldn’t 
be too safe, there was always evil.... 
Had he felt her, even then, beginning to recede... 
called up the control from across the Wall as a way of 
holding on? She was deepening from his waking, his social 


170 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


eye like light at the edge of the evening when, for per- 
haps a perilous ten minutes, nothing helps: put on your 
glasses and light lamps, sit by the west window and still it 
keeps going away, you keep losing the light and perhaps 
it is forever this time ...a good time of day for learning 
surrender, learning to diminish like the light, or like cer- 
tain music. This surrender is his only gift. Afterward he 
can recall nothing. Sometimes, rarely, there may be tan- 
talizing—not words, but halos of meaning around words 
his mouth evidently spoke, that only stay behind—if they 
do—for a moment, like dreams, can’t be held or developed, 
and, presently, go away. He’s been under Rollo Groast’s 
EEG countless times since first he came to “The White 
Visitation,” and all’s normal-adult except for, oh once or 
twice perhaps a stray 50-millivolt spike off a temporal 
lobe, now left now right, really no pattern to it—indeed a 
kind of canals-of-Mars controversy has been in progress for 
these years among the different observers—Aaron Throw- 
ster swears he’s seen slow delta-wave shapes out of the left 
frontal and suspects a tumor, last summer Edwin Treacle 
_ noted a “subdued petitmal spike-and-wave alternation, 
curiously much slower than the usual three per second”— 
though admittedly Treacle was up in London all the night 
before debauching with Allen Lamplighter and his gam- 
bling crowd. Less than a week later the buzzbomb gave 
Lamplighter his chance: to find Eventyr from the other 
side and prove to him to be what others had said: an 
interface between the worlds, a sensitive. Lamplighter had 
suffered 5-to-2 odds. But so far he’s been silent: nothing 
in the soft acetate/metal discs or typed transcripts that 
mightn’t be any of a dozen other souls... . 

They've come, in their time, from as far way as the 
institute at Bristol to gape at, to measure and systemati- 
cally doubt the freaks of Psi Section. Here’s Ronald Cherry- 
coke, the noted psychometrist, eyes lightly fluttering, hands 
a steady inch away framing the brown-wrapped box in 
which are securely hidden certain early-War mementos, a 
dark-maroon cravat, a broken Schaeffer fountain pen, a 
tarnished pince-nez of white gold, all belonging to a Group 
Captain “Basher” St. Blaise, stationed far) away north of 
London... as this Cherrycoke, a normal-looking lad, per- 
haps a bit overweight, begins now to recite in his lathe- 


Beyond the Zero 171 


humming Midland accents an intimate résumé of the 
Group Captain, his anxieties about his falling hair, his 
enthusiasm over the Donald Duck cinema cartoons, an 
incident during the Liibeck raid which only he and. his 
wingman, now passed on, shared and agreed not to re- 
port—nothing that violated security: confirmed later, in 
fact, by St. Blaise himself smiling a bit openmouthed well 
the joke’s certainly on me and now tell me how'd you do 
it? Indeed, how does Cherrycoke do it? How do any of 
them? How does Margaret Quartertone produce voices on 
dises and wire recorders miles distant without speaking or 
physically touching the equipment? And what speakers are 
now beginning to assemble? Where are the five-digit 
groups coming from which the Reverend Dr. Paul de la 
Nuit, chaplain and staff automatist, has been writing for 
weeks now, and which, it is felt ominously, no one up in 
London quite knows how to decrypt? What do Edwin 
Treacle’s recent dreams of flight mean, especially as time- 
correlated with Nora Dodson-Truck’s dreams of falling? 
What gathers among them all, that each in his own freak 
way can testify to but not in language, not even the lingua 
franca of the offices? Turbulences in the aether, uncertain- 
ties out in the winds of karma, Those souls across the 
interface, those we call the dead, are increasingly anxious 
and eyasive. Even Carroll Eventyr’s own control, the 
habitually cool and sarcastic Peter Sachsa, the one who 
found him that day long ago on the Embankment and 
thereafter—whenever there are messages to be passed 
across—even Sachsa’s become nervous. . . . 

Lately, as if all tuned in to the same acthereal’ Xth 
Programme, new varieties of freak have been showing up 
at “The White Visitation,” all hours of the day and night, 
silent, staring, expecting to be taken care of, carrying 
machines of black metal and glass gingerbread, off on 
waxy trances, hyperkinetically waiting only the right 
trigger-question to start blithering 200 word a minute 
about their special, terrible endowments. An assault, What 
are we to make of Gavin Trefoil, for whose gift there’s 
not even a name yet? (Rollo Groast wants to call it auto- 
chromatism.) Gavin, the youngest here, only 17, can some- 
how metabolize at will one of his amino acids, tyrosine. 
This will produce melanin, which is the brown-black pig- 


172 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


ment responsible for human skin color, Gavin can also 
inhibit this metabolizing by—it appears—varying the level 
of his blood phenylalanine. So he can change his color 
from most ghastly albino up through a smooth spectrum 
to very deep, purplish, black. If he concentrates he can 
keep this up, at any level, for weeks. Usually he is dis- 
tracted, or forgets, and gradually drifts back to his rest 
state, a pale freckled redhead’s complexion. But you can 
imagine how useful he was to Gerhardt yon Gdll during 
the shooting of the Schwarzkommando footage: he helped 
save literally hours of make-up and lighting work, acting 
as a variable reflector. The best theory of how is Rollo’s, 
but it’s hopelessly vague—we do know that the dermal 
cells which produce melanin—the melanocytes—were 
once, in each of us, at an early stage of embryonic growth, 
part of the central nervous system. But as the embryo 
grows, as tissue goes on differentiating, some of these nerve 
cells move away from what will be the CNS, and migrate 
out to the skin, to become melanocytes. They keep their 
original tree-branch shapes, the axon and dendrites of the 
typical nerve cell. But the dendrites are used now to 
carry not electric signals but skin pigment. Rollo Groast 
believes in some link, so far undiscovered—some surviving 
cell-memory that will, retrocolonial, still respond to mes- 
sages from the metropolitan brain. Messages that young 
Trefoil may not consciously know of. “It is part,” Rollo 
writes home to the elder Dr. Groast in Lancashire, in 
elaborate revenge for childhood tales of Jenny Greenteeth 
waiting out in the fens to drown him, “part of an old and 
clandestine drama for which the human body serves only 
as a set of very allusive, often cryptic programme-notes— 
it’s as if the body we can measure is a scrap of this pro- 
gramme found outside in the street, near a magnificent 
stone theatre we cannot enter. The convolutions of lan- 
guage denied us! the great Stage, even darker than Mr. 
Tyrone Guthrie’s accustomed murk.... Gilt and mirror- 
ing, red velvet, tier on tier of box seats all in shadows too, 
as somewhere down in that deep proscenium, deeper than 
geometries we know of, the voices utter 'secrets we are 
never told... .” | 

—Everything that comes out from CNS we have to file 
here, you see. It gets to be a damned nuisance after a 


Beyond the Zero 173 


while. Most of it’s utterly useless, But you never know 

_ when they'll want something. Middle of the night, or dur- 
ing the worst part of an ultraviolet bombardment you 
know, it makes no difference to them back there. 

__—Do you ever get out much to...well, up to the 
Outer Level? 

(A long pause in which the older operative stares quite 
openly, as several changes flow across her features— 
amusement, pity, concern—until the younger one speaks 
again.) I-I’'m sorry, I didn’t mean to be— 

—(Abruptly) I’m supposed to tell you, eventually, as 

part of the briefing. 

—Tell me what? 

—Just as I was told once. We hand it on, one genera- 

- tion to the next. (There is no piece of business plausible 
enough for her to find refuge in. We sense that this has 
not. yet become routine for her. Out of decency now, she 

tries to speak quietly, if not gently.) We all go up to the 
Outer Level, young man. Some immediately, others not 

- for a while. But sooner or later everyone out here has to 
go Epidermal. No exceptions, 

—Has to— 

—Im sorry. 

—But isn’t it...I thought it was only a—well, a level. 
A place you'd visit. Isn’t it... ?P 

—Outlandish scenery, oh yes so did I—unusual forma- 
tions, a peep into the Outer Radiance. But it’s all of us, 
you see. Millions of us, changed to interface, to horn, and 
no feeling, and silence. 

Oh, God. (A pause in which he tries to take it ine 
then, in panic, pushes it back.) No—how can you say 

_ that—you can’t feel the memory? the tug...we’re in 
exile, we do have a home! (Silence from the other.) Back 

there! Not up at the interface. Back in the CNS! 

_. —(Quietly) It’s been a prevalent notion. Fallen sparks, 

_ Fragments of vessels broken at the Creation. And someday, 
somehow, before the end, a gathering back to home. A 
messenger from the Kingdom, arriving at the last moment. 
But I tell you there is no such message, no such home— 
_ only the millions of last moments. . .no more, Our history 
is an aggregate of last moments. 

» She crosses the complex room dense with its supple 


174 Geitae Rainsow 


hides, lemon-rubbed teak, rising snarls of incense, bright 
optical hardware, faded Central Asian rugs in gold and 
scarlet, hanging open-ribbed wrought-ironwork, a long, 
long downstage cross, eating an orange, section by acid 
section, as she goes, the faille gown flowing beautifully, its 
elaborate sleeves falling from very broadened shoulders till 
tightly gathered into long button-strung cuffs all in some 
nameless earth tone—a hedge-green, a clay-brown, a touch 
of oxidation, a breath of the autumnal—the light from the 
street lamps comes in through philodendron stalks and 
fingered leaves arrested in a grasp at the last straining 
away of sunset, falls a tranquil yellow across the cut-steel 
buckles at her insteps and streaks on along the flanks and 
down the tall heels of her patent shoes, so polished as to 
seem of no color at all past such mild citrus light where 
it touches them, and they refuse it, as if it were a maso- 
chist’s kiss. Behind her steps the carpet relaxes ceiling- 
ward, sole and heel-shapes disappearing visibly slow out 
of the wool pile. A single rocket explosion comes thudding 
across the city, from far east of here, east by southeast. 
The light along her shoes flows and checks like afternoon 
trafic. She pauses, reminded of something; the military 
frock trembling, silk filling-yarns shivering by crowded 
thousands as the chilly light slides over and off and touch- 
ing again their unprotected backs. The smells of burning 
musk and sandalwood, of leather and spilled whisky, 
thicken in the room. 

And he—passive as trance, allowing her beauty: to 
enter him or avoid him, whatever’s to be her pleasure. 
How shall he be other than mild receiver, filler of silences? 
All the radii of the room are hers, watery cellophane, 
crackling tangential as she turns on her heel-axis, lancing 
as she begins to retrace her path. Can he have loved her 
for nearly a decade? It’s incredible. This connoisseuse of 
“splendid weaknesses,” run not by any lust or even velleity 
but by vacuum: by the absence of human hope. She is’ 
frightening. Someone called her an erotic nihilist ... each 
of them, Cherrycoke, Paul de la Nuit, even, he would 
imagine, young Trefoil, even—so he’s heard—Margaret 
Quartertone, each of them used for the ideology of the 
Zero...to make Nora’s great rejection that much more 
awesome. For...if she does love him: if all her words, 


ne) | 


* 


- Beyond the Zero 175 


this decade of rooms and conversations meant anything... 


_ if she loves him and still will deny him, on the short end 


of 5-to-2 deny his gift, deny what’s distributed in his every 
cell... then... 
If she loves him. He’s ‘too passive, he hasn’t the nerve 


to reach in, as Cherrycoke has tried to....°Of course 


Cherrycoke is odd. He laughs too often. Not aimlessly 


- either, but directed at something he thinks everyone else 


can see too. All of us watching some wry newsreel, the 
beam from the projector falling milky-white, thickening 
with smoke from briers and cheroots. Abdullas and Wood- 
bines...the lit profiles of military personnel and young 
ladies are the edges of clouds: the manly crepe of an over- 
seas cap knifing forward into the darkened cinema, the 
shiny rounding of a silk leg tossed lazily toe-in between 
two seats in the row ahead, the keen-shadowed turbans of 
velvet and feathering eyelashes beneath. Among these 
nights’ faint and lusting couples, Ronald Cherrycoke’s 
laughing and bearing his loneliness, brittle, easily crazed, 
oozing gum from the cracks, a strange mac of most un- 
stable plastic.... Of ‘all her splendid weaklings, it is he 
who undertakes the most perilous trips into her void, look- 
ing for a heart whose rhythms he will call. It must astonish 
her, Nora-so-heartless, Cherrycoke kneeling, stirring her 
silks, between his hands old history flowing in eddy-cur- 
rents—scarves of lime, aqua, lavender passing, pins, 


_ brooches, opalescent scorpions (her birth sign) inside gold 


mountings in triskelion, shoe-buckles, broken nacre fans 
and theatre programs, suspender-tabs, dark, lank, pre- 
austerity stockings...on his unaccustomed knees, hands 
swimming, turning, seeking out her past in molecular 
traces so precarious among the flow of objects, the prog- 
ress through his hands, she delighted to issue her denials, 
covering up his hits (close, often dead on) skillfully as if 


_ it were drawing-room comedy.... 


It's a dangerous game Cherrycoke’s playing here. Often 
thinks the sheer volume of information pouring in 
through his fingers will saturate, burn him out... she 
seems determined to overwhelm him with her history and 


s 


_ its pain, and the edge of it, always fresh from the stone, 


cutting at his hopes, at all their hopes. He does respect 
: he knows that very little of this is female theatricals, 


176 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


really, She has turned her face, more than once, to the 
Outer Radiance and simply seen nothing there. And so each 
time has taken a little more of the Zero into herself. It 
comes down to courage, at worst an amount of self-delud- 
ing that’s vanishingly small: he has to admire it, even if 
he can’t accept her glassy wastes, her appeals to a day 
not of wrath but of final indifference.... Any more than 
she can accept the truth he knows about himself, He does 
receive emanations, impressions...the cry inside the 
stone... excremental kisses stitched unseen across the 
yoke of an old shirt...a betrayal, an informer whose 
guilt will sicken one day to throat cancer, chiming like 
daylight through the fourchettes and quirks of a tattered 
Italian glove... Basher St. Blaise’s angel, miles beyond 
designating, rising over Liibeck that Palm Sunday with the 
poison-green domes undemeath its feet, an obsessive cross- 
flow of red tiles rushing up and down a thousand peaked 
roofs as the bombers banked and dived, the Baltic already 
lost in a poll of incendiary smoke behind, here was the 
Angel: ice crystals swept hissing away from the back edges 
of wings perilously deep, opening as they were moved into 
new white abyss. ... For half a minute radio silence broke 
apart. The traffic being: 

St. Blaise: Freakshow Two, did you see that, over. 

Wingman: This is Freakshow Two—affirmative. 

St. Blaise: Good. si 

No one else on the mission seemed to’ve had radio com- 
munication. After the raid, St. Blaise checked over the 
equipment of those who got back to base and found noth- 
ing wrong: all the crystals on frequency, the power sup- 
plies rippleless as could be expected—but others remem- 
bered. how, for the few moments the visitation lasted, even 
static vanished from the earphones. Some may have heard 
a high singing, like wind among masts, shrouds, bedspring 
or dish antennas of winter fleets down in the dockyards... 
but only Basher and his wingman saw it, droning across: 
in front of the fiery leagues of face, the eyes, which went 
towering for miles, shifting to follow their flight, the irises 
red as embers fairing through yellow to| white, as they 
jettisoned all their bombs in no particular pattern, the 
fussy Norden.device, sweat drops in the air all around its 
rolling eyepiece, bewildered at their unannounced need to 
climb, to give up.a strike at earth for a strike at heaven.... 


Beyond the Zero 477 


Group Captain St. Blaise did not include an account of 
this angel in his official debriefing, the W.A.A.F. officer 
who interrogated him being known around the base as the 
worst sort of literal-minded dragon (she had reported 


_ Blowitt to psychiatric for his rainbowed Valkyrie over 


Peenemiinde, and Creepham for the bright blue gremlins 
scattering like spiders off of his Typhoon’s wings and fall- 
ing gently to the woods of The Hague in little parachutes 


_ of the same color). But damn it, this was not a cloud. 


Unofficially, in the fortnight between the fire-raising at 
 Liibeck and Hitler’s order for “terror attacks of a retalia- 
tory nature’—meaning the V-weapons—word of the Angel 
got around. Although the Group Captain seemed reluctant, 


~ Ronald Cherrycoke was allowed to probe certain objects 


along on the flight. Thus the Angel was revealed. 
Carroll Eventyr attempted then to reach across to Ter- 
ence Overbaby, St. Blaise’s wingman. Jumped by a skyful 
of MEs and no way out. The inputs were confusing. Peter 
Sachsa intimated that there were in fact many versions of 
the Angel which might apply. Overbaby’s was not as avail- 
able as certain others. There are problems with levels, and 
with Judgment, in the Tarot sense. ... This is part of the 
storm that sweeps now among them all, both sides of 
Death. It is unpleasant. On his side, Eventyr tends to feel 
wholly victimized, even a bit resentful. Peter Sachsa, on 
his, falls amazingly out of character and into nostalgia for 
life, the old peace, the Weimar decadence that kept him 
fed and moving. Taken forcibly over in 1930 by a blow 
from a police truncheon during a street action in Neu- 
kélln, he recalls now, sentimentally, evenings of rubbed 
darkwood, cigar smoke, ladies in chiseled jade, panne, 
attar of damask roses, the latest angular pastel paintings 
on the walls, the latest drugs inside the many little table 
drawers. More than any mere “Kreis,” on most nights full 
mandalas came to bloom: all degrees of society, all quar- 
ters of the capital, palms down on that famous blood 
veneer, touching only at little fingers. Sachsa’s table was 
like a deep pool in the forest. Beneath the surface things 
were rolling, slipping, beginning to rise.... Walter Asch 
(“Taurus”) was visited one night by something so un- 
usual it took three “Hieropons” (250 mg.) to bring him 
back, and even so he seemed reluctant to sleep. They all 


\ stood watching him, in ragged rows resembling athletic 


Lan 
a 


a 5 
se 
: 
: 


178 GRAVITY’s RAINBOW 


formations, Wimpe the IG-man who happened to be hold- 
ing the Hieropon keying on Sargner, a civilian attached 
to General Staff, flanked by Lieutenant Weissmann, re- 
cently back from South-West Africa, and the Herero aide 
he’d brought with him, staring, staring at them all, at 
everything ... while behind them ladies moved in a sibilant 
weave, sequins and high-albedo stockings aflash, black- 
and-white make-up in daintily nasal alarm, eyes wide 
going oh.... Each face that watched Walter Asch was a 
puppet stage: each a separate routine. | 

... Shows good hands yes droop.and wrists as far up as 
muscle relaxant respiratory depression .. . 

...Same...same... my own face white in mirror three 
threethirty four march of the Hours clock ticking room no 
can’t go in no not enough light not enough no aaahhh— 

.. theatre nothing but Walter really look at head phony 
angle wants to catch light good fill-light throw a yellow 
geld. 

(A pneumatic toy frog jumps up onto a lily pad 
trembling: beneath the surface lies a terror... a late cap- 
tivity... but he floats now over the head of what would 
take him back... his eyes cannot be read. .. .) 

..mba rara m’eroto ondyoze...mbe mu munine 
m’oruroto ayo u n’omuinyo... (further back than this is a 
twisting of yarns or cordage, a giant web, a wrenching of 
hide, of muscles in the hard grip of something that comes 
to wrestle when the night is deep... and a sense, too, of 
visitation by the dead, afterward a sick feeling that they 
are not as friendly as they seemed to be... he has wak- 
ened, cried, sought explanation, but no one ever told him 
anything he could believe. The dead have talked with him, 
come and sat, shared his milk, told stories of ancestors, or 
of spirits from other parts of the veld—for time and space 
on their side have no meaning, all is together). 

“There are. sociologies,” Edwin Treacle, his hair going 
all directions, attempts to light a pipeful of wretched left- 
overs—autumn leaves, bits of string, fag-ends, “that we 
haven’t even begun to look into. The sociology of our own 
lot, for example. Psi Section, the S.P.R., the old ladies in 
Altrincham trying to summon up the Devil, all of us on 
this side, you see, are still only half the story.” 

“Careful with that ‘we,’ ” Roger Mexico distracted sedey 


Beyond the Zero ne 


_ by a hundred things, chi-square fittings that refuse to jibe, 
textbooks. lost, Jessica’s absence. ... 

“It makes no sense unless we also consider those who've ) 

_ passed over to the other side. We do transact with them, 
don’t we? Through specialists like Eventyr and their con- 
trols over there. But all together we form a single sub- 
culture, a psychical community, if you will.” 

“I won't,” Mexico says dryly, “but yes I suppose some- 
one ought to be looking into it.” 
“There are peoples—these Hereros for example—who | 
‘carry on business every day with their ancestors. The dead 
are as real as the living. How can you understand them 
without treating both sides of the wall of death with the 
same scientific approach?” 
And yet for Eventyr it’s not the social transaction 
Treacle hopes it is: There’s no memory on his side: no 
personal record. He has to read about it in the notes. of 
others, listen to discs. Which means he has to trust the 
others. Thats a complicated social setup. He must base 
the major part of his life on the probity of men charged 
with acting as interface between what he is supposed to be 
and himself. Eventyr knows how close he is to Sachsa on 
the other side, but he doesn’t remember, and he’s been 
brought up a Christian, a Western European, believing in 
the primacy of the “conscious” self and its memories, re- 
garding all the rest as abnormal or trivial, and so he is 
troubled, deeply... . 

_ The transcripts are a document on Peter Sachsa as much 
as on the souls he puts in touch. They tell, in some detail, 
of his obsessive love for Leni Pékler; who was married to 
a young chemical engineer and also active with the K.P.D., 
shuttling between the 12th District and Sachsa’s sittings. 
Each night she came he wanted to cry at the sight of her 
captivity. In her smudged eyes was clear hatred of a life 

_she would not leave: a husband she didn’t love, a child 
she had not learned to escape feeling guilty for not loving 
enough. 

The husband Franz had a connection, too vague for 
Sachsa to pass across, with Army Ordnance, and so there 

' were also ideological barriers that neither one found energy 

enough to climb. She attended street actions, Franz re-— 

: ported to the rocket facility at Reinickendorf after swal- 

. 

me | 


iets 
> , 


. 


180 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


lowing his tea in an early-morning room full of women 
he thought were sullen and waiting for him to leave: 
bringing their bundles of leaflets, their knapsacks stuffed 
with books or political newspapers, filtering through the 
slum courtyards of Berlin at sunrise. ... 


O 


They are shivering and hungry. In the Studentenheim 
there’s no heat, not much light, millions of roaches. A 
smell of cabbage, old second Reich, grandmothers’ cab- 
bage, of lard smoke that has found, over the years, some 
détente with the air that seeks to break it down, smells of 
long illness and terminal occupation stir the crumbling walls. 
One of the walls is stained yellow with waste from the broken 
lines upstairs. Leni sits on the floor with four or five others, 
passing a dark chunk of bread. In a damp nest of Die 
Faust Hoch, back issues no one will read, her daughter 
Ilse sleeps, breathing so shallow it can hardly be seen. Her 
eyelashes make enormous shadows on the upper curves of 
her cheeks. 

They have left for good this time. This room will be,all 
right for another day, even two... after that Leni doesn’t 
know. She took one valise for both ‘of them. Does he know 
what it means for a woman born under the Crab, a mother, 
to have all her home in a valise? She has a few marks with 
her, Franz has his toy rockets to the moon. It is really 
over. 

As she used to dream it, dudes go directly to Peter 
Sachsa. If he didn’t take her in, he’d at least help her to 
find a job. But now that she’s "really broken away from 
Franz... there’s something, some nasty aig belliger- 
ence that will rise up in Peter now and then.... Lately 
she isn’t sure about his moods, He’s under pressure from 
levels she guesses to be higher than eee and he isn’t 
handling it well. . 

But Peter’s worst infantile rages are still better iets 
the most tranquil evenings of her Piscean husband, swim- 
ming his seas of fantasy, deathwish, rocket-mysticism— 
Franz is just the type they want. They know how to use 
that. They know how to use nearly corey What will 
happen to the ones they can’t useP 


Beyond the Zero 181 


Rudi, Vanya, Rebecca, here we are a slice of Berlin 
life, another Ufa masterpiece, token La Bohéme Student, 
token Slay, token Jewess, look at us: the Revolution. Of 
course there is no Revolution, not even in the Kinos, no — 
German October, not under this “Republic.” The Revolu- 
tion died—though Leni was only a young girl and not 

_ political—with Rosa Luxemburg. The best there is to be- 
lieve in right now is a Revolution-in-exile-in-residence, a 
continuity, surviving at the bleak edge over these Weimar 
years, waiting its moment and its reincarnated Luxem- 
burg.... 

AN ARMY OF LOVERS CAN BE BEATEN. These things ap- 
pear on the walls of the Red districts in the course of the 

~ night. Nobody can track down author or painter for any 
of them, leading you to suspect they’re one and the same. 
Enough to make you believe in a folk-consciousness. They 

_ are not slogans so much as texts, revealed in order to be 

thought about, expanded on, translated into action by the 
people. ... 

“It’s true,” Vanya now, “look at the forms. of capitalist 
expression. Pornographies: pornographies of love, erotic 
love, Christian love, boy-and-his-dog, pornographies of 
sunsets, pornographies of killing, and pornographies of 
deduction—ahh, that sigh when we guess the murderer— 
all these novels, these films and songs they lull us with, 
they're approaches, more comfortable and less so, to that 
Absolute Comfort.” A pause to allow Rudi a quick and sour 
grin. “The self-induced orgasm.” 

- “*Absolute’P” Rebecca coming forward on her bare knees 
to hand him the bread, damp, melting from the touch of 
her wet mouth, “Two people are—” - 

“Two people is what you are told,” Rudi does not quite 
smirk. Through her attention, sadly and not for the first 
time around here, there passes the phrase male supremacy 
«.. why do they cherish their masturbating so? “but in 
nature it is almost unknown. Most of it’s solitary. You 
know that.” 

__ “I know there’s coming together,” is all she says. Though 

_ they have never made love she means it as a reproach. But 

_ he turns away as we do from those who have just made 

Some embarrassing appeal to faith there’s no way to go 

- into any further. 


182 Gravity's RaInBow 


Leni, from inside her wasted time with Franz, knows 
enough about coming alone. At first his passivity kept her 
from coming at all. Then she understood that she could 
make up anything at all to fill the freedom he allowed her. 
It got more comfortable: she could dream such tender- 
nesses between them (presently she was dreaming also of 
other men)—but it became more solitary. Yet her lines 
will not deepen fast enough, her mouth not learn harden- 
ing past a face she keeps surprising herself with, a day- 
dreaming child’s face, betraying her to anyone who'll look, 
exactly the sort of fat-softened, unfocused weakness that 
causes men to read her as Dependent Little Girl—even in 
Peter Sachsa she’s seen the look—and the dream is the 
same one she went to find while Franz groaned inside his 
own dark pain-wishes, a dream of gentleness, light, her 
criminal heart redeemed, no more need to run, to struggle, 
a man arriving tranquil as she and strong, the street be- 
coming a distant memory: exactly the one dream that out 
here she can least allow herself. She knows what she has 
to impersonate. Especially with Ilse watching her more. 
Ilse is not going to be used. 

Rebecca’s been carrying on an argument with Vanya, 
half flirting, Vanya trying to keep it all in intellectual code, 
but the Jewess reverting, time and again, to the bodily... 
so sensual; the insides of her thighs, just above the knee, 
smooth as oil, the tenseness of all her muscles, the alert 
face, the Judenschnautze feinting, pushing, the flashes of 
tongue against thick lips... what would it be like, to be 
taken to bed by her? To do it not just with another women, 
but with a Jewess.... Their animal darkness. .. sweating 
hindquarters, pushing aggressively toward her face, black 
hairs darkening in fine crescent around each buttock from 
the crevice... the face turned over a shoulder smiling in 
coarse delight . . . all by surprise, really, during a moment’s 
refuge in a pale yellow room, while the men wandered the 
halls outside with drugged smiles... “No, not that hard. 
Be gentle. I'll tell you when to do it harder. ...” Leni’s 
fair skin, her look of innocence, and the Jewess’s darker 
coloring, her rawness, contrasting with Leni’s delicacy of 
structure and skin, pelvic bones stretching cobwebs 
smoothly down groins and around belly, the two women 
sliding, snarling, gasping...I know there’s coming to- 


- Beyond the Zero 183 


gether ... and Leni waking alone—the Jewess out already 
in some other room of the place—never having known the 
instant at which she fell into her true infant sleep, a soft 
change of state that just didn’t happen with Franz.... So 
she brushed and batted with fingertips her hair to show 
something of how she felt about the night’s clientele and 
strolled down to the baths, stripped without caring what 
eyes were on her and slid into the body-warmth, the con- 
ventional perfume of it... . All at once, through a shouting 
and humidity that might have made it hard to concentrate, 
she saw, there, up on one of the ledges, looking down at 
her... Yes he was Richard Hirsch, from the Mausigstrasse, 
so many years ago... she knew immediately that her face 
had never looked more vulnerable—she could see it in his 
eyes.... 

All round them the others splashed, made love, carried 
on comic monologues, perhaps they were friends of his— 
yes wasn’t that Siggi frog-kicking by, we called him “the 
Troll,” he hasn’t grown a centimeter since then... since 
we ran home along the canal, tripped and fell on the 
hardest cobblestones in the world, and woke in the morm- 
ings to see snow on the spokes of the wagon wheels, steam 
out the old horse’s nose.... “Leni. Leni.” Richard’s hair 
pushed all the way back, his body golden, leaning to lift — 
her from the cloudy bath, to sit beside him. 

“You're supposed to be...” she’s flustered, doesn’t know 
how to put this. “Someone told me you hadn’t come back 
from France. . . .” She stares at her knees. 

“Not even the French girls could have kept me in 
France.” He’s still there: she feels him trying to look in her 
eyes: and he speaks so simply, he’s so alive, sure that 
French girls must be more coercive than English machine 
guns...she knows, filled with crying for his innocence, 
that he can’t have been with anyone there, that French 
a still are to him beautiful and remote agents of 

ae 
In Leni, now, nothing of her long employment shows, 
nothing. She is the child he looked at across park path- 
‘ways, or met trudging home down the gassen in the . 
crust-brown light, her face, rather broad then, angled 
down, fair eyebrows troubled, bookpack on her back, 
hands in apron pockets... some of the stones in the walls 


i 


a 


184 ; Gravity’s RAInBow- 


were white as paste...she may have seen him coming 
the other way, but he was older, always with friends. ... 

Now they all grow less raucous around them, more 
deferent, even shy, happy for Richard and Leni. “Better 
late than never!” pipes Siggi in his speeded-up midget’s 
voice, reaching on tiptoe to pour May wine in all their 
.glasses. Leni goes to get her hair restyled and lightened a 
shade, and Rebecca comes with her. They talk, for the 
first time, of plans and futures. Without touching, Richard 
and she have fallen in love, as they should have then. 
It’s understood he'll take her away with him.... 

Old Gymnasium friends have been showing up in recent 
days, bringing exotic food and wine, new drugs, much 
ease and honesty in sexual matters. No one bothers to 
dress. They show one another their naked bodies. No one 
feels anxious, or threatened about the size of her breasts or 
his penis.... It is all beautifully relaxing for everyone. 
Leni practices her new name, “Leni Hirsch,” even some- 
times when she’s sitting with Richard at a café table in the 
morning: “Leni Hirsch,” and he actually smiles, embar- 
rassed, tries to look away but can’t escape her eyes and 
finally he turns full into her own look, laughs out loud, a 
laugh of pure joy, and reaches his hand, the palm of his 
dear hand, to hold her face. . 

On a multi-leveled early eventag of balconies, terraces, 
audiences grouped at the different levels, all looking down- 
ward, in toward a common center, galleries of young 
women with green leaves at their waists, tall evergreen 
trees, lawns, flowing water and national solemnity, the 
President, in the middle of asking the Bundestag, with his 
familiar clogged and nasal voice, for a giant war appropria- 
tion, breaks down suddenly: “Oh, fuck it...” Fickt es, the 
soon-to-be-immortal phrase, rings in the sky, rings over 
the land, Ja, fickt es! “I’m sending all the soldiers home. 
We'll close down the weapon factories, we'll dump all the 
weapons in the sea. I’m sick of war. ’m ee of waking 
up every morning afraid I’m going to die.” It is suddenly 
impossible to hate him any more: he’s as human, as mortal 
now, as any of the people. There will be |new elections, 
The Left will run a woman whose name is never given, 
but everyone understands it is Rosa Luxemburg. The other 
candidates will be chosen so inept or colorless that no one 


nn 


Beyond the Zero 185 


will vote for them. There will be a chance for the Revolu- 
tion, The President has promised. 

Incredible joy at the baths, among the friends. True joy: 
events in a dialectical process cannot bring this explosion 


' of the heart. Everyone is in love. ... 


AN ARMY OF LOVERS CAN BE BEATEN. 
Rudi and Vanya have fallen to arguing street tactics. 


- Somewhere water is dripping. The street reaches in, makes 


itself felt everywhere. Leni knows it, hates it. The im- 
possibility of any rest...needing to trust strangers who 


may be working for the police, if not right now then a 


little later, when the street has grown for them more deso- 
late than they can bear... She wishes she knew of ways 
to keep it from her child, but already that may be too late. 
Franz—Franz was never much in the street. Always some 
excuse. Worried about security, being caught on a stray 
frame by one of the leather-coated photographers, who 
will be always at the fringes of the action. Or it was, 
“What'll we do with Ilse? What if there’s violence?” If 
there’s violence, what'll we do with Franz? 

She tried to explain to him about the level you reach, 


_ with both feet in, when you lose your fear, you lose it all, 


you've penetrated the moment, slipping perfectly into its 
grooves, metal-gray but soft as latex, and now the figures 


are dancing, each pre-choreographed exactly where it is, 


the flash of knees under pearl-colored frock as the girl in 
the babushka stoops to pick up a cobble, the man the black 
suitcoat and brown sleeveless sweater grabbed by police- 
men one on either arm, trying to keep his head up, show- 


_ ing his teeth, the older liberal in the dirty beige overcoat, 
_ stepping back to avoid a careening demonstrator, looking 
_ back across his lapel how-dare-you or look-out-not-me, 


his eyeglasses filled with the glare of the winter sky. There 
is the moment, and its possibilities. 

She even tried, from what little calculus she’d picked 
up, to explain it to Franz as At approaching zero, eternally 
approaching, the slices of time growing thinner and 
thinner, a succession of rooms each with walls more silver, 


_ transparent, as the’pure light of the zero comes nearer.... 


But he shook his head. “Not the same, Leni. The im- 


_ portant thing is taking a function to its limit. At is just a 
_ convenience, so that it can happen.” 


186 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


He has, had, this way of removing all the excitement 
from things with a few words. Not even well-chosen words: 
he’s that way by instinct. When they went to movies he 
would fall asleep. He fell asleep during Nibelungen. He 
missed Attila the Hun roaring in from the East to wipe 
out the Burgundians. Franz loved films but this was how 
he watched them, nodding in and out of sleep. “You're 
the cause-and-effect man,” she cried. How did he connect 
together the fragments he saw while his eyes were open? 

He was the cause-and-effect man: he kept at her 
astrology without mercy, telling her what she was sup- 
posed to believe, then denying it. “Tides, radio inter- 
ference, damned little else. There is no way for changes 
out there to produce changes here.” 

“Not produce,” she tried, “not cause. It all goes along 
together. Parallel, not series. Metaphor. Signs and symp- 
toms. Mapping on to different coordinate systems, I don’t 
know...” She didn’t know, all she was trying to do was 
reach, 

But he said: “Try to design anything that way and 
have it work.” 

They saw Die Frau im Mond. Franz was amused, con- 
descending. He picked at technical points. He knew some 
of the people who'd worked on the special effects, Leni 
saw a dream of flight. One of many possible. Real flight 
and dreams of flight go together. Both are part of the 
same movement. Not A before B, but all together.... 

Could anything with him ever have lasted? If the 


_ Jewish wolf Pflaumbaum had not set the torch to his own 


paint factory by the canal, Franz might have labored out 
their days dedicated to the Jew’s impossible scheme of 
developing patterned paint, dissolving crystal after patient 
crystal, controlling the temperatures with obsessive care 
so that on cooling the amorphous swirl might, this time 
might, suddenly shift, lock into stripes, polka-dots, plaid, 
stars of David—instead of finding one early morning a 
blackened waste, paint cans exploded in great bursts of 
crimson and bottle-green, smells of charred wood and 
naphtha, Plaumbaum wringing his hands oy, oy, oy, the 
sneaking hypocrite. All for the insurance. P 

So Franz and Leni were very hungry for a time, with 
Ilse growing in her belly each day. What jobs came along 


(oe zt 
ia Beyond the Zero 187 
were menial and paid hardly enough to matter. It was 
breaking him. Then he met his old friend from the T.H. 
Munich one night out in the swampy suburbs. 
_ He'd been out all day, the proletarian husband, out past- 
‘ing up bills to advertise some happy Max Schlepzig film 
fantasy, while Leni lay pregnant, forced to turn when the 
pain in her back got too bad, inside their furnished dust- 
bin in the last of the tenement’s Hinterhéfe. It. was well 
after dark and bitter cold by the time his paste bucket was 
empty and the ads all put up to be pissed. on, torn down, 
‘swastikaed over. (It may have been a quota film. There 
may have been a misprint. But when he arrived at the 
theatre on the date printed on the bill, he found the 
place dark, chips of plaster littering the floor of the 
lobby, and a terrible smashing far back inside the theatre, 
the sound of a demolition crew except that there were no 
voices, nor even any light that he could see back there... 
he called, but the wrecking only went on, a loud creaking 
in the bowels behind the electric marquee, which he 
noticed now was blank....) He had wandered, bone- 
tired, miles northward into Reinickendorf, a quarter of 
small factories, rusted sheeting on the roofs, brothels, 
sheds, expansions of brick into night and disuse, repair 
shops where the water in the vats for cooling the work lay 
stagnant and scummed over. Only a sprinkling of lights. 
Vacancy, weeds in the lots, no one in the streets: a neigh- 
borhood where glass breaks every night. It must have 
been the wind that was carrying him down a dirt road, 
past the old army garrison the local police had taken over, 
among the shacks and tool cribs to a wire fence with a 
gate. He found the gate open, and pushed through. He’d 
become aware of a sound, somewhere ahead. One summer 
before the World War, he’d gone to Schaffhausen on holi- 
day with his parents, and they’d taken the electric tram 
to the Rhine Falls, They went down a stairway and out 
on to a little wood pavilion with a pointed roof—all around 
them were clouds, rainbows, drops of fire. And the roar of 
the waterfall. He held on to both their hands, suspended 
in the cold spray-cloud with Mutti and Papi, barely able to 
see above to the trees that clung to the fall’s brim in a 
green wet smudge, or the little tour boats below that came 
up nearly to where the cataract crashed into the Rhine. 


—- 


188 Gravity's Rainsow 


But now, in the winter heart of Reinickendorf, he was 
alone, hands empty, stumbling over frozen mud through 
an old ammunition dump grown over with birch and wil- 
low, swelling in the darkness to hills, sinking to swamp. 
Concrete barracks and earthworks 40 feet high towered in 
the middle distance as the sound beyond them, the sound 
of a waterfall, grew louder, calling from his memory. 
These were the kinds of revenants that found Franz, not 
persons but forms of energy, abstractions. ... 

Through a gap in the breastwork he saw then a tiny 
silver egg, with a flame, pure and steady, issuing from 
beneath, lighting the forms of men in suits, sweaters, over- 
coats, watching from bunkers or ‘trenches. It was a rocket, 
in its stand: a static test. 

The sound began to change, to break now and then. 
It didn’t sound ominous to Franz in his wonder, only 
different. But the light grew brighter, and the watching 
figures suddenly started dropping for cover as the rocket 
now gave a sputtering roar, a long burst, voices screaming 
get down and he hit the dirt just as the silver thing blew 
apart, a terrific blast, metal whining through the air where 
he'd stood, Franz hugging the ground, ears ringing, no 
feeling even for the cold, no way for the moment’ of 
knowing if he was still inside his body. ... 

Feet approached running. He looked up and saw Kurt 
Mondaugen. The wind all night, perhaps all year, had 
brought them together. This is what he came to believe, 
that it was the wind. Most of the schoolboy fat was re- 
placed now by muscle, his hair was thinning, his com- 
plexion darker than anything Franz had seen in the street 
that winter, dark even in the concrete folds of shadow 
and the flames from the scattered rocket fuel, but it was 

-Mondaugen sure enough, seven or eight years gone but 
they knew each other in the instant. They’d lived in the 
same drafty mansarde in the Liebigstrasse in Munich. 
(Franz had seen the address then as a lucky omen, for 
Justus von Liebig had been one of his heroes, a hero of 
chemistry. Later, as confirmation, his course in polymer 
theory was taught by Professor-Doctor “Lalo Jamf, who 
was latest in the true succession, Liebig to August Wil- 
helm von Hofmann, to Herbert Ganister: to Laszlo Jamf, a 
direct chain, cause-and-effect.) They'd ridden the same 


Meer n sy ee aS 
* % fin ry 


Be ci, te. eee Beyond the Zero 189 


rattling Schnellbahnwagen with its three contact arms 
frail as insect legs squeaking along the wires overhead to 

‘the T.H.: Mondaugen had been in electrical engineering. 
On graduating he’d gone off to South-West Africa, on 

‘some kind of radio research project. They had written for 

_a while, then stopped. 

Their reunion went on till very late, in a Reinickendorf 
beer hall, undergraduate hollering among the working-class 
drinkers, a jubilant and grandiose past-mortem on the 
rocket test—scrawling on soggy paper napkins, all talking 
at once around the glass-cluttered table, arguing through 
the smoke and noise heat flux, specific impulse, propellant 
flow.... 

“Tt was a failure,” Franz weaving; under their electric 
bulb at three or four in the morning, a loose grin on his 
face, “it failed, Leni, but they talk only of success! Twenty 
kilograms of thrust and only for a few seconds, but no 

one’s ever done it before. 1 couldn’t believe it Leni I saw 
something that, that no one ever did before... .” 

He meant to accuse her, she imagined, of conditioning 
him to despair. But she only wanted him to grow up. 
What kind of Wandervégel idiocy is it to run around all 
night in a marsh calling yourselves the Society for Space 
Navigation? : 

Leni grew up in Liibeck, in a row of kleinbiirger houses 
beside the Trave. Smooth trees, spaced evenly all along the 
riverward edge of her cobbled street, arched their long 
boughs over the water. From her bedroom window she 
could see the twin spires of the Dom rising above the 
housetops. Her fetid back-court existence in Berlin was 
only a decompression lock—must be. Her way out of that 
fussy Biedermeier strangulation, her dues payable against 
better times, after the Revolution. 

Franz, in play, often called her “Lenin.” There was 
never doubt about who was active, who possive—still she 
had hoped he’d grow beyond it. She has talked to psy- 
ehiatrists, she knows about the German male at puberty. 
On their backs in the meadows and mountaius, watching 
the sky, masturbating, yearning. Destiny waits, a darkness 

latent in the texture of the summer wind. Destiny will be- 
tray you, crush your ideals, deliver you into the same 

detestable Biirgerlichkeit as your father, sucking at his 


" 


7 


i: 


190 Graviry’s Rainsow 


pipe on Sunday strolls after church past the row houses by 
the river—dress you in the gray uniform of another family 
man, and without a whimper you will serve out your time, 
fly from pain to duty, from joy to work, from commitment 
to neutrality. Destiny does all this to you. 

Franz loved her neurotically, masochistically, he be- 
longed to her and believed that she would carry him on 
her back, away to a place where Destiny couldn’t reach. 
As if it were gravity. He had half-awakened one night 
burrowing his face into her- armpit mumbling, “Your 
wings...oh, Leni, your wings...” 

But her wings can only carry her own weight, and she 
hopes Ilse’s, for a while. Franz is a dead weight. Let him 
look for flight out at the Raketenflugplatz, where he goes 
to be used by the military and the cartels, Let him fly to 
the dead moon if he wants to.... 

Ilse is awake, and crying. No food all day. They ought 
to try Peter’s after all. He'll have milk. Rebecca holds out 
what’s left of the end crust she’s been eating. “Would she 
like this?” 

Not much of the Jew in her. Why are half the Leftists 
she knows Jewish? She immediately reminds herself that 
Marx was one, A racial affinity for the books, the theory, a 
rabbinical love of loud argument... She gives the crust 
to her child, picks her up. 

“If he comes here, tell him you haven’t seen me.” 

They arrive at Peter Sachsa’s well after dark. She finds a 
séance just about to begin. She is immediately aware of 
her drab coat and cotton dress (hemline too high), her 
scuffed and city-dusted shoes, her lack of jewelry. More 
middle-class reflexes... vestiges, she hopes. But most of 
the women are old. The others are too dazzling. Hmm. 
The men look more affluent than usual. Leni spots a silver 

_lapel-swastika here and there. Wines on the tables ate the 
great “20s and ’21s. Schloss Vollrads, Zeltinger, Pies- 
porter—it is an Occasion. 

The objective tonight is to get in touch with the late 
foreign minister Walter Rathenau. At the Gymnasium, 
Leni sang with the other children the o ing anti- 
Semitic street refrain of the time: 


Knallt ab den Juden Rathenau, 
Die gottverdammte Judensau ... 


Beyond the Zero 191 


After he was assassinated she sang nothing for weeks, cer- 
tain that, if the singing hadn’t brought it about, at-least it 
had been a prophecy, a spell. ... 

There are specific messages tonight. Questions for the 
former minister. A gentle sorting-out process is under way. 
Reasons of ‘security. Only certain guests are allowed to go 
on into Peter’s sitting room. The preterite stay outside, 
gossiping, showing their gums out. of tension, moving 
their hands. ... The big scandal around IG Farben this 
week is the unlucky subsidiary Spottbilligfilm AG, whose 
entire management are about to be purged for sending to 
OKW weapons procurement a design proposal for a new 
airborne ray which could tum whole populations, inside a 
ten-kilometer radius, stone blind. An IG review board 
caught the scheme in time. Poor Spottbilligfilm. It had 
slipped their collective mind what such a weapon would 
do to the dye market after the next war. The Gétter- 
dammerung mentality again. The weapon had been known 


as L-5227, L standing for light, another comical German 


= 


euphemism, like the A in rocket designations which stands 
for aggregate, or IG itself, Interessengemeinschaft, a 
fellowship of interests...and what about the case. of 
catalyst poisoning in Prague—was it true that the VI b 
Group. Staffs at the Chemical Instrumentality for the Ab- 
normal have been flown east on emergency status, and that 
it’s a complex poisoning, both selenium and tellurium... 
the names of the poisons sober the conversation, like a 
mention of cancer.... 

The elite who will sit tonight are from the corporate 
Nazi crowd, among them Leni recognizes who but Gene- 
raldirektor Smaragd, of an IG branch that was interested, 
for a time, in her husband. But then abruptly there’d been 
no more contact. It would have been mysterious, a little 
sinister, except that everything in those days could reason- 
ably be blamed on the economy. ... 

In the crowd her eyes meet Peter’s. “I’ve left him,” she 
whispers, nodding, as he shakes hands. 

“You can put Ilse to sleep in one of the bedrooms. Can 
we talk later?” There is to his eyes tonight a definite 
faunish slant. Will he accept that she is not his, any more 
than she belonged to Franz? 

“Yes, of course. What’s going on?” . 

He snorts, meaning they haven't told me, They are 


192 Gravity’s RAINBOW — 


using him—have been, various theys, for ten years. But 
he never knows how, except by rare accident, an allusion, 
an interception of smiles. A distorting and forever clouded 
mirror, the smiles of clients.... 

Why do they want Rathenau tonight? What did Caesar 
really whisper to his protégé as he fell? Et tu, Brute, the 
official lie, is about what you’d expect to get from them— 
it says exactly nothing. The moment of assassination is the 
moment when power and the ignorance of power come 
together, with Death as validator. When one speaks to the 
other then it is not to pass the time of day with et-tu- 
Brutes. What passes is a truth so terrible that history—at 
best a conspiracy, not always among gentlemen, to de- 
fraud—will never admit it. The truth will be repressed or 
in ages of particular elegance be disguised as something 
else. What will Rathenau, past the moment, years into a 
new otherside existence, have to say about the old dis- 
pensation? Probably nothing as incredible as what he might 
have said just as the shock flashed his mortal nerves, as 
the Angel swooped in.... 

But they will see. Rathenau—according to the his- 
tories—was prophet and architect of the cartelized state. 
From what began as a tiny bureau at the War Office in 
Berlin, he had coordinated Germany’s economy during the 
World War, controlling supplies, quotas and prices, cutting 
across and demolishing the barriers of secrecy and prop- 
erty that separated firm from firm—a corporate Bismarck, 
before whose power no account book was too privileged, 
no agreement too clandestine. His father Emil Rathenau 
had founded AEG, the German General Electric Company, 
but young Walter was more than another industrial heir— 
he was a philosopher with a vision of the postwar State. 
He saw the war in progress as a world revolution, out of 
which would rise neither Red communism nor an un- 
hindered Right, but a rational structure in which business 
would be the true, the rightful authority—a structure based, 
not surprisingly, on the one he'd Bet in Germany 
for fighting the World War. 

Thus the official version. Grandiose en ich. But Gene- 
raldirektor Smaragd and colleagues are ies to be told 
what even the masses believe. It might almost—if one 
were paranoid enough—seem to be a collaboration here, 
between both sides of the Wall, matter and spirit. What 


Beyond the Zero 193 


is it they know that the powerless do not? What terrible 
je sca behind the appearances of diversity and enter- 
prise 

Gallows humor. A damned parlor game. Smaragd can- 
not really believe in any of this, Smaragd the technician 
and manager. He may only: want signs, omens, confirma- 
tions of what’s already in being, something to giggle over 
among the Herrenklub—“We even have the Jew’s bless- 
ing!” Whatever comes through the medium tonight they 
will warp, they will edit, into a blessing. It is contempt 
of a rare order, 

Leni finds a couch in a quiet corner of a room full of 
Chinese ivory and silk hangings, lies on it, one calf dan- 
gling, and tries to relax. Franz now will be home from the 
rocket-field, blinking under the bulb as Frau Silberschlag 
next door delivers Leni’s last message. Messages tonight, 
borne on the lights of Berlin... neon, incandescent, stel- 
lar... messages weave into a net of information that no 
one can escape.... 

“The path is clear,” a voice moving Sachsa’s lips and 
rigid white throat. “You are constrained, over there, to 
follow it in time, one step after another. But here it’s pos- 
sible to see the whole shape at once—not for me, I’m not 
that far along—but many know it as a clear presence... 
‘shape’ isn’t really the right word.... Let me be honest 
with you. I’m finding it harder to put myself in your 
shoes. Problems you may be having, even those of global 
implication, seem to many of us here only trivial side- 
trips. You are off on a winding and difficult road, which 
you conceive to be wide and straight, an Autobahn you 
can travel at your ease. Is it any use for me to tell you 
that all you believe real is illusion? I don’t know whether 
you'll listen, or ignore it. You only want to know about 
your path, your Autobahn. 

“All right. Mauve: that’s in the pattern. The invention 
of mauve, the coming to your level of the color mauve. 
Are you listening, Generaldirektor?” 

“I am listening, Herr Rathenau,” replies Smaragd of 
IG Farben. : 

“Tyrian purple, alizarin and indigo, other coal-tar dyes 
are here, but the important one is mauve. William Perkin 
discovered it in England, but he was trained by Hofmann, 
who was trained by Liebig. There is a succession involved. 


} 


194 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


If it is karmic it’s only in a very limited sense. .. another 
Englishman, Herbert Ganister, and the generation of 
chemists he trained.... Then the discovery of Oneirine. 
Ask your man Wimpe. He is the expert on cyclized benzyl- 
isoquinilines. Look into the clinical effects of the drug. I 
don’t know. It seems that you might look in that direction. 
It converges with the mauve-Perkin-Ganister line. But all 
I have is the molecule, the sketch... Methoneirine, as 
the sulfate. Not in Germany, but in the United States. 
There is a link to the United States. A link to Russia. Why 
do you think von Maltzan and I saw the Rapallo treaty 
through? It was necessary to move to the east. Wimpe 
can tell you. Wimpe, the V-Mann, was always there. Why 
do you think we wanted Krupp to sell them agricultural 
machinery so badly? It was also part of the process. At the 
time I didn’t understand it as clearly as I do now. But I 
knew what I had to do. 

“Consider coal and steel. There is a place where they 
meet. The interface between coal and steel is coal-tar. 
Imagine coal, down in the earth, dead black, no light, the 
very substance of death. Death ancient, prehistoric, spe- 
cies we will never see again. Growing older, blacker, 
deeper, in layers of perpetual night. Above ground, the 
steel rolls out fiery, bright. But to make steel, the coal tars, 
darker and heavier, must be taken from the original coal, 
Earth’s excrement, purged out for the ennoblement of 
shining steel. Passed over. 

“We thought of this as an industrial process. It was 
more. We passed over the coal-tars. A thousand different 
molecules waited in the preterite dung. This is the sign of 
revealing. Of unfolding. This is oné meaning of mauve, 
the first new color on Earth, leaping to Earth’s light from 
its grave miles and aeons below. There is the other mean- 
ing... the succession... I can’t see that far yet. . 

“But this is all the impersonation of life. The real move- 
ment is not from death to any rebirth. It . from death to 
death-transfigured. The best you can do is! to polymerize 
a few dead molecules. But polymerizing is sgt resurrection, 
I mean your IG, Generaldirektor.” 

“Our IG, I should have thought,” ina lempengil with 
more than the usual ice and stiffness. 

“That’s for you to work out. If you a to call this a 
liaison, do, I am here for as long as you need me. You 


Beyond the Zero 195 


don’t have to listen. You think you'd rather hear about 
what you call ‘life’; the growing, organic Kartell. But it’s 
only another illusion. A very clever robot. The more dy- 
namic it seems to you, the more deep and dead, in reality, 
it grows. Look at the smokestacks, how they proliferate, 
fanning the wastes of original waste over greater and 
greater masses of city. Structurally, they are strongest in 
compression. A smokestack can survive any explosion— 
even the shock wave from one of the new cosmic bombs”— 
a bit of a murmur around the table at this—“as you all 
must know. The persistence, then, of structures favoring 
death. Death converted into more death. Perfecting its 
reign, just as the buried coal grows denser, and overlaid 
with more strata—epoch on top of epoch, city on top of 
ruined city. This is the sign of Death the impersonator. 

“These signs are real. They are also symptoms of a 
process. The process follows the same form, the same 
structure. To apprehend it you will follow the signs. All 
talk of cause and effect is secular history, and secular 
history is a diversionary tactic. Useful to you, gentlemen, 
but no longer so to us here. If you want the truth—I 
know I presume—you must look into the technology of 
these matters. Even into the hearts of certain molecules— 
it is they after all which dictate temperatures, pressures, 
rates of flow, costs, profits, the shapes of towers.... 

“You must ask two questions. First, what is the real 
‘nature of synthesis? And then: what is the real nature of 
control? 

“You think you know, you cling to your beliefs. But 
sooner or later you will have to let them go....” 

A silence, which prolongs itself. There is some shifting 
in the seats around the table, but the sets of little fingers 
stay in touch. : 

“Herr RathenauP Could you tell me one thing?” It is 
Heinz Rippenstoss, the irrepressible Nazi wag and gad- 
about. The sitters begin to giggle, and Peter Sachsa to 
return to his room. “Is God really Jewish?” 


a) 


Pumm, Easterling, Dromond, Lamplighter, Spectro are — 
stars on the doctor’s holiday tree. Shining down on this 


196 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


holiest of nights..Each is a cold announcement of dead 
ends, suns that will refuse to stand, but flee south, ever 
south, leaving us to north-without-end, But Kevin Spectro 
is brightest, most distant of all, And the crowds they 
swarm in Knightsbridge, and the wireless carols drone, 
and the Underground’s a mob-scene, but Pointsman’s all 
alone. But he’s got his Xmas present, fa la la, he won't 
have to settle for any Spam-tin dog this year mates, he’s 
got his own miracle and human child, grown to manhood 
but carrying, someplace on the Slothropian cortex now a 
bit of Psychology’s own childhood, yes pure history, inert, 
encysted, unmoved by jazz, depression, war—a survival, 
if you will, of a piece of the late Dr. Jamf himself, past 
death, past the reckoning of the, the old central chamber 
you know.... 

He has no one to ask, no one to tell. My heart, he feels, 
my heart floods now with such virility and hope. ... News 
from the Riviera is splendid. Experiments here begin to 
run smoothly for a change. From some dark overlap, a 
general appropriation or sinking fund someplace, Briga- 
dier Pudding has even improved the funding for ARF. 
Does he feel Pointsman’s power too? Is he buying some 
insurance? 

At odd moments of the day Pointsman, fascinated, dis- 
covers himself with an erect penis. He begins making 
jokes, English Pavlovian jokes, nearly all of which depend 
on one unhappy accident: the Latin cortex translates into 
English as “bark,” not to mention the well-known and 
humorous relation between dogs and trees (these are bad 
enough, and most PISCES folk have the good sense to 
avoid them, but they are dazzling witticisms compared 
with jokes out of the mainstream, such as the extraordinary 
“What did the Cockney exclaim to the cowboy from San 
Antonio?”). Sometime during the annual PISCES Christmas 
Party, Pointsman is led by Maudie Chilkes to a closet full 
of belladonna, gauze, thistle tubes, and the scent of surgi- 
cal rubber, where in a flash she’s down on her red knees, 
unbuttoning his trousers, as he, confused, good God, 
strokes her hair, clumsily shaking much pf it loose from 
its wine-colored ribbon—here what’s this, an actual, slick 
and crimson, hot, squeak-stockinged slavegirl “gam” yes — 
right among these winter-pale clinical halls, with the dis- 


Beyond the Zero 197 


tant gramophone playing rumba music, basses, wood- — 
blocks, wearied blown sheets of tropic string cadences 
audible as everyone dances back there on the uncarpeted 
floors, and the old Palladian shell, conch of a thousand 
rooms, gives, resonates, shifting stresses along walls and 
joists ... . bold Maud, this is incredible, taking the pink 
Pavlovian cock in as far as it will go, chin to collarbone 
vertical as a sword-swallower, releasing him each time 
with some small ladylike choking sound, fumes of expen- 
sive Scotch rising flowerlike, and her hands up grabbing 
the loose wool seat of his pants, pleating, unpleating—it’s 
happening so fast that Pointsman only sways, blinks a bit 
drunkenly you know, wondering if he’s dreaming or has 
found the perfect mixture, try to remember, amphetamine 
sulphate, 5 mg q 6 h, last night amobarbital sodium 0.2 
Gm. at bedtime, this moming assorted breakfast vitamin 
capsules, alcohol an ounce, say, per hour, over the past... 
how many cc.s is that and oh, Jesus I'm coming. Am I? 
yes... well...and Maud, .dear Maudie, swallowing, 
wastes not a drop...smiling quietly, unplugged at last, 
she returns the unstiffening hawk to its cold bachelor nest 
but kneels still a bit longer in the closet of this moment, 
the drafty, white-lit moment, some piece by Emesto Le- 
cuona, “Siboney” perhaps, now reaching them down cor- 
ridors long as the sealanes back to the green shoals, slime 
stone battlements, and palm evenings of Cuba...a Vic- 
torian pose, her cheek against his leg, his high-veined hand 
against her face. But no one saw them, then or ever, and 
in the winter ahead, here and there, her look will cross his 
and she'll begin to blush red as her knees, she'll come to 
his room off the lab once or twice perhaps, but somehow 
they're never to have this again, this sudden tropics in the 
held breath of war and English December, this moment of 
perfect peace.... 

No one to tell. Maud knows something’s up all right, the 
finances of PISCES pass through her hands, nothing es- 
capes her. But he can’t tell her... or not everything, not 
the exact terms of his hope, he’s never, even to himself... 
it lies ahead in the dark, defined inversely, by horror, by 
ways all hopes might yet be defeated and he find only his 
death, that dumb, empty joke, at the end of this Pavlovian’s 
Progress. 


198 Graviry’s RaInsow 


Now Thomas Gwenhidwy too senses change fibrillating 
in the face and step of his colleague. Fat, prematurely 
white Santa Claus beard, a listing, rumpled showman, per- 
forming every instant, trying to speak a double language, 
both Welsh comic-provincial and hard diamond gone-a- 
begging truth, hear what you will. His singing voice is 
incredible, in his spare time he strolls out past the wire- 
mesh fighter runways looking for bigger planes—for he 
loves to practice the bass part to “Diadem” as the Flying 
Fortresses take off at full power, and even so you can 
hear him, bone-vibrating and pure above the bombers, all 
the way to Stoke Poges, you see. Once a lady even wrote 
in to the Times from Luton Hoo, Bedfordshire, asking who 
was the man with the lovely deep voice singing “Dia- 
dem.” A Mrs. Snade. Gwenhidwy likes to drink a lot, 
grain alcohol mostly, mixed in great strange mad-scientist 
concoctions with beef tea, grenadine, cough syrup, bitter 
belch-gathering infusions of blue scullcap, valerian root, 
motherwort and lady’s-slipper, whatever's to hand really, 
His is the hale alcoholic style celebrated in national leg- 
end and song. He is descended directly from the Welsh- 
man in Henry V who ran around forcing people to eat his 
Leek. None of your sedentary drinkers though. Pointsman 
has never seen Gwenhidwy off of his feet or standing 
still—he fusses endlessly pitch-and-roll avast you scum 
down the long rows of sick or dying faces, and even Points- 
man has noted rough love in the minor gestures, changes 
of breathing and voice. They are blacks, Indians, Ashke- 
nazic Jews speaking dialects you never heard in Harley 
Street: they have been bombed out, frozen, starved, 
meanly sheltered, and their faces, even the children’s, all 
Possess some ancient intimacy with pain and reverse that 
amazes Pointsman, who is more polarized upon West End 
catalogues of genteel signs and symptoms, headborn ano- 
rexias and constipations the Welshman could have little 
patience with. On Gwenhidwy’s wards some BMRs run 
low as —35, —4o. The white lines go thickening across the 
X-ray ghosts of bones, gray scrapings fom underneath © 
tongues bloom beneath his old wrinkle-black microscope 
into clouds of Vincentesque invaders, nasty little fangs © 
achop and looking to ulcerate the vitamin-poor tissue they : 
came from. A quite different domain altogether, you see. : 


fe pai apes 
4 Beyond the Zero 199 


-*T don’t know, man—no, I don’t,” flinging a fat slow- 
motion arm out of his hedgehog-colored cape, back at the 
hospital, as they walk in the falling snow—to Pointsman a 
clear separation, monks here and cathedral there, soldiers 
and garrison—but not so to Gwenhidwy, part of whom 
remains behind, hostage. The streets are empty, it’s Christ- 
mas day, they are tramping uphill to Gwenhidwy’s rooms 
as the quiet snow curtains fall on and on between them- 
selves and the pierced wall of the institution marching in 
stone parallax away into a white gloom. “How they per- 
sist. The poor, the black. And the Jews! The Welsh, the 
Welsh once upon a time were Jewish too? one of the Lost 
Tribes of Israel, a black tribe, who wandered overland, 
centuries? oh an incredible journey. Until at last they 
reached Wales, you see.” 

- “Wales...” 

, “Stayed on, and became the Cymri. What if we're all 
Jews, you see? all scattered like seeds? still flying out- 
ag from the primal fist so long ago. Man, I believe 

Bt 

“Of course you do, Gwenhidwy.” 

“Aren’t we then? What about you?” 

“I don’t know. I don’t feel Jewish today.” 

“I meant flying outward?” He means alone and forever 
separate: Pointsman knows what he means. So, by surprise, 
something in him is touched. He feels the Christmas snow 
now at crevices of this boots, the bitter cold trying to get 
in. The brown wool flank of Gwenhidwy moves at the edge 
of his sight, a pocket of color, a holdout against this whit- 
ening day. Flying outward. Flying . .. Gwenhidwy, a mil- 
lion ice-points falling at a slant across his caped immen- 
sity, looking so improbable of extinction that now, from 
where it’s been lying, the same yawing-drunk chattering 
fear returns, the Curse of the Book, and here is someone 
he wants, truly, with all his mean heart, to see preserved 
... though he’s been too shy, or proud, ever to’ve smiled 
at Gwenhidwy without some kind of speech to explain and 
cancel out the smile. ... 

_ Dogs run barking at their approach. They get the Pro- 
fessional Eye from Pointsman. Gwenhidwy is humming 
“Aberystwyth.” Out comes. the doorkeeper’s daughter 
Estelle with a shivering kid or two underfoot and a Christ- 


ve 
»¥ 


200 Gravity's Rainsow 


mas bottle of something acrid but very warming inside 
the breast after about the first minute it’s down. Smells of 
coal smoke, piss, garbage, last night’s bubble-and-squeak, 
fill the hallways. Gwenhidwy is drinking from the bottle, 
carrying on a running slap-and-tickle with Estelle and 
getting in a fast game of where’d-he-go-there-he-is with 
Arch her youngest around the broad mouton hipline of his 
mother who keeps trying to smack him but he’s too fast. 

Gwenhidwy breathes upon a gas meter which is frozen 
all through, too tight to accept coins, Terrible weather. He 
surrounds it, curses it, bending like a screen iover, wings 
of his cape reaching to enfold—Gwenhidwy, radiating like 
att: eo 

Out the windows of the sitting-room are a row of bare 
Army-colored poplars, a canal, a snowy trainyard, and 
beyond it a long sawtooth pile of scrap coal, still smolder- 
ing from a V-bomb yesterday. Ragged smoke is carried 
askew, curling, broken and back to earth by the falling 
snow. 

“It’s the closest yet,” Gwenhidwy at the kettle, the sour 
smell of a sulfur match in the air, After a moment, still on 
watch over the gas ring, “Pointsman, do you want to hear 
something really paranoid?” ns 

“You too?” 

“Have you consulted a map of London lately? All this 
great me-teoric plague of V-weapons, is being dumped 
out here, you see. Not back on Whitehall, where it’s sup- 
posed to be, but on me, and I think it is beast-ly?” 

“What a damned unpatriotic thing to say.” phd 

“Oh,” hawking and spitting into the washbowl, “you 

don’t want to believe it. Why should you? ‘Harley Street 
lot, my good Jesus Christ.” came ‘tet 

It’s an old game with Gwenhidwy, Royal Fellow—bait- 
ing. Some unaccustomed wind or thermocline along the 
sky is bringing them down the deep choral hum of Ameri- 
can bombers: Death’s white Gymanfa Ganu. A switching- 
locomotive creeps silently across the web of tracks below. 

“They're falling in a Poisson distribution,” says Points- 
man in a small voice, as if it was open to challenge. : 

“No doubt man, no doubt—an excellent point. But all 
over the fucking East End, you see.” Arch, or someone, 
has drawn a brown, orange, and blue Gwenhidwy carrying 


| 
| 
| 
| 


/ aes 


Beyond the Zero 201 


a doctor’s bag along a flat horizon-line past a green gas- 
works. The bag’s full of gin bottles, Gwenhidwy is smiling, 
a robin is peeking out from its nest in his beard, and the 
sky is blue and the sun yellow. “But have you ever thought 
of why? Here is the City Paranoiac. All these long cen- 
turies, growing over the country-side? like an intelligent 
creature. An actor, a fantastic mimic, Pointsman! Count- 
erfeiting all the correct forces? the eco-nomic, the demo- 
graphic? oh yes even the ran-dom, you see.” 

“What do you mean ‘T see’? I don’t see.” Against the 
window, backlit by the white afternoon, Pointsman’s face 
is invisible except for a tiny bright crescent glowing off 
each eyeball. Should he fumble behind him for the win- 
dow catch? Is the woolly Welshman gone raving mad, 
thenP 

“You don’t see them,” steam in tight brocade starting 
to issue from the steel-blotched swan’s mouth, “the blacks 
and Jews, in their darkness. You can’t. You don’t hear their 
silence. You became so used to talking, and to light.” 

“To barking, anyway.” 

“Nothing comes through my hos-pital but fail-ure, you 
see.” Staring with a fixed, fool-alcoholic smile. “What can 
I cure? I can only send them back, outside again? Back to 
that? It might as well be Europe here, com-bat, splint-ing 
and drug-ging them all into some mini-mum condition to 
get on with the kill-ing?” 

“Here, don’t you know there’s a war on?” Thus Points- 
man receives, with his cup, a terrible scowl. In truth, he 
is hoping with nitwit irrelevancies to discourage Gwen- 
hidwy from going on about his City Paranoiac. Pointsman 
would rather talk about the rocket victims admitted today 
to the hospital down there. But this is exorcism man, it is 
the poet singing back the silence, adjuring the white riders, 
and Gwenhidwy knows, as Pointsman cannot, that it’s part 
of the plan of the day to sit inside this mean room and cry 
into just such a deafness: that Mr. Pointsman is to play 
exactly himself—stylized, irritable, uncomprehending.... 

“In some cities the rich live upon the heights, and the 
‘poor are found below. In others the rich occupy the shore- 
line, while the poor must live inland. Now in London, 
here is a gra-dient of wretchedness? increasing as the river 
widens to the sea. I am only ask-ing, why? Is it because of 


202 Graviry’s Rainsow 


the ship-ping? Is it in the pat-terns of land use, especially 
those relating to the Industrial Age? Is it a case of an-cient 
tribal tabu, surviving down all the Eng-lish generations? 
No. The true reason is the Threat From The East, you 
see. And the South: from the mass of Eu-rope, certainly. 
The people out there were meant to go down first. We're 
expendable: those in the West End, and north of the river 
are not. Oh, I don’t mean the Threat has this or that 
specific shape. Political, no. If the City Paranoiac dreams, 
it’s not accessible to us. Perhaps the Ci-ty dreamed of 
another, en-emy city, float-ing across the sea to invade the 
es-tuary ...or of waves of darkness... waves of fire.... 
Perhaps of being swallowed again, by the immense, the 
si-lent Mother Con-tinent? It’s none of my business, city 
dreams.... But what if the Ci-ty were a growing neo- 
plasm, across the centuries, always chang-ing, to meet 
exactly the chang-ing shape of its very worst, se-cret fears? 
The raggedy pawns, the disgraced bish-op and cowardly 
knight, all we condemned, we irreversibly lost, are left 
out here, exposed and wait-ing. It was known, don’t deny 
it—known, Pointsman! that the front in Eu-rope someday 
must develop like thisP move away east, make the rock-ets 
necessary, and known how, and where, the rockets would 
fall short. Ask your friend Mexico? look at the densities 
on his map? east, east, and south of the river too, where 
all the bugs live, that’s who’s getting it thick-est, my 
friend.” _ 

“You're right, Gwenhidwy,” judicious, sipping his tea, 
“that is very paranoid,” 

“It’s true.” He is out with the festive bottle of Vat 69 
now, and about to pour them a toast. 

“To the babies.” Grinning, completely mad. 

“Babies, Gwenhidwy?” 

“Ah. I’ve been keep-ing my own map? Plot-ting da-ta 
from the maternity wards. The ba-bies born during this 
Blitz are al-so fol-lowing a Poisson distribution, you see.” 

“Well—to the oddness of it, then. Poor little bastards.” 

Later, toward dusk, several enormous water bugs, a very 
dark reddish brown, emerge like elves from the wainscot- 
ing, and go lumbering toward the larder—pregnant 
mother bugs too, with baby translucent outrider bugs 
flowing along like a convoy escort. At night, in the very 


Beyond the Zero 203 


late silences between bombers, ack-ack fire and falling 
rockets, they can be heard, loud as mice, munching 
through Gwenhidwy’s paper sacks, leaving streaks and 
- footprints of shit the color of themselves behind. They 
-. don’t seem to go in much for soft things, fruits, vegetables, 
‘and such, it’s more the solid lentils and beans they’re into, 
stuff they can gnaw at, paper and plaster barriers, hard 
interfaces to be pierced, for they are agents of unification, 
you see. Christmas bugs. They were deep in the straw of 
the manger at Bethelehem, they stumbled, climbed, fell 
glistening red among a golden lattice of straw that must 
_ have seemed to extend miles up and downward—an edible 
tenement-world, now and then gnawed through to disrupt 
some mysterious sheaf of vectors that would send neighbor 
bugs tumbling ass-over-antennas down past you as you 
held on with all legs in that constant tremble of golden 
stalks. A tranquil world: the temperature and humidity 
staying nearly steady, the day’s cycle damped to only a 
soft easy sway of light, gold to antique-gold to shadows, 
and back again. The crying of the infant reached you, 
perhaps, as bursts of energy from the invisible distance, 
nearly unsensed, often ignored. Your savior, you see.... 


O 


Inside the bowl, the two goldfish are making a Pisces sign, 
head-to-tail and very still. Penelope sit and peers into their 
world. There is a little sunken galleon, a china diver in a 
diving suit, pretty stones and shells she and her sisters 
have brought back from the sea. 

Aunt Jessica and Uncle Roger are out in the kitchen, 
hugging and kissing. Elizabeth is teasing Clare in the hall- 
way. Their mother is in the W.C. Sooty the cat sleeps in a 
chair, a black thundercloud on the way to something else, 
who happens right now to look like a cat. It’s Boxing Day. 
The evening’s very still. The last rocket bomb was an 
hour ago, somewhere south. Claire got a golliwog, Penel- 
_ope a sweater, Elizabeth a frock that Penelope will grow 
into. 

The pantomine Roger took them all to see this after- 
noon was Hansel and Gretel. Claire immediately took off 


204 Graviry’s RAINBOW ~ 


under the seats where others were moving about by secret 
paths, a flash of braid or white collar now and then among 
the tall attentive uncles in uniform, the coat-draped backs 
of seats. On stage Hansel, who was supposed to be a boy 
but was really a tall girl in tights and smock, cowered in- 
side the cage. The funny old Witch foamed at the mouth 
and climbed the scenery. And pretty Gretel waited by the 
Oven for her chance.... 

Then the Germans dropped a rocket just down the street 
from the theatre, A few of the little babies started crying. 
They were scared. Gretel, who was just winding up with 
her broom to hit the Witch right in the bum, stopped: 
put the broom down, in the gathering silence stepped to 
the footlights, and sang: 


Oh, don’t let it get you, 

It will if they let you, but there’s 

Something I'll bet you can’t see— 

It’s big and it’s nasty and it’s right over there, 
It’s waiting to get its sticky claws in your hair! 

Oh, the greengrocer’s wishing on a rainbow today, 
And the dustman is tying his tie... 

And it all goes along to the same jolly song, 

With a peppermint face in the sky! 


“Now sing along,” she smiled, and actually got the audi- 
ence, even Roger, to sing: 


With a peppermint face in the sky-y, 

And a withered old dream in your heart, 

You'll get hit with a piece of the pie-ie, 

With the pantomime ready to start! : 

Oh, the Tommy is sleeping in a snowbank tonight, 
And the Jerries are learning tofly— 

We can fly to the moon, we'll be higher than noon, 
In our polythene home in the sky.... 


Pretty polythene home in the sky, 

Pretty platinum pins in your hand— 

Oh your mother’s a big fat machine sas 

And your father’s a dreary young man. . 
(Whispered and staccato): 

Oh, the, man-a-ger’s suck-ing on a cay. pipe, 

And the bank-ers are, eat-ing their, wives, 1 

All the world’s in a daze, while the orchestra plays, 

So turn your pockets and get your surprise— _ 


| 


Beyond the Zero : 205° 


Turn your pockets and get-your surpri-ise, 

There was nobody there af-ter alll 

And the lamps up the stairway are dying, 

It’s the season just after the ball... 

Oh the palm-trees whisper on the beach somewhere, 
And the lifesaver’s heaving a sigh, 

And those voices you hear, Boy and Girl of the Year, 
Are of children who are learning to die. ... 


Penelope’s father’s chair, in the corner, next to the table 
with the lamp, is empty. It faces her now. She can see the 
crocheted shawl over the back, many knots of gray, tan, 
black, and brown, with amazing clarity. In the pattern, or’ _ 
in front of it, something is stirring: at first no more than 
refraction, as if there were a source of heat directly in 
front of the empty chair. 

“No,” she whispers out loud. “I don’t want to. You’re 
not him. I don’t know who you are but you're not my 
father. Go away.” 

Its arms and legs are silent and rigid. She stares into it. 

I only want to visit you. 

“You want to possess me.” 

Demonic possessions in this house are not unknown. Is 
this really Keith, her father? taken when she was half her 
present age, and returned now as not the man she knew, 
but. only the shell—with the soft meaty slug of soul that 
smiles and loves, that feels its mortality, either rotted 
away or been picked at by the needle mouths of death-by- 
government—a process by which living souls unwillingly 
become the demons known to the main sequence of West- 
ern magic as the Qlippoth, Shells of the Dead.... It is 
also what the present dispensation often does to decent 
men and women entirely on this side of the grave. In 
neither process is there any dignity, or any mercy. Moth- 
ers and fathers are conditioned into deliberately dying in 
certain preferred ways: giving , themselves cancer and 
heart attacks, getting into motor accidents, going off to 
fight in the war—leaving their children alone in the forest. 
Theyll always tell you fathers are “taken,” but fathers 
only leave—that’s what it, really is. The fathers are all 

covering for each other, that’s all,. Perhaps it’s even better 
_ to have this presence, rubbing the room dry as glass, 
‘slipping in and out of an old chair, than a father who still 


206 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


hasn’t died yet, a man you love and have to watch it 
happening to.... 

In the kitchen, the water in the kettle shakes, creaks 
toward boiling, and outside the wind blows. Somewhere, 
in another street, a roofslate slides and falls. Roger las 
taken Jessica’s cold hands in to warm against his breast, 
feeling them, icy, through his sweater and shirt, folded in 
against him. Yet she stands apart, trembling. He wants to 
warm all of her, not just comic extremities, wants beyond 
reasonable hope. His heart shakes like the boiling kettle. 

It has begun to reveal itself: how easily she might go. 
For the first time he understands why this is the same as 
mortality, and why he will cry when she leaves. He is 
learning to recognize the times when nothing really holds 
her but his skinny, 20-pushup arms.... If she leaves, then 
it ceases to matter how the rockets fall. But the coinci- 
dence of maps, girls, and rocketfalls has entered him 
silently, silent as ice, and Quisling molecules have shifted 
in latticelike ways to freeze him. If he could be with her 
more...if it happened when they were together—in 
another time that might have sounded romantic, but in a 
culture of death, certain situations are just more hep to 
the jive than others—but they’re apart so much. . 

If the rockets don’t get her there’s still her lieu tenaae 
Damned Beaver/Jeremy is the War, he is every assertion 
the fucking War has ever made—that we are meant for 
work and government, for austerity: and these shall take 
priority over love, dreams, the spirit, the senses and the 
other second-class trivia that are found among the idle 
and mindless hours of the day.... Damn them, they are 
wrong. They are insane. Jeremy will take her like the 
Angel itself, in his joyless weasel-worded come-along, and 
Roger will be forgotten, an amusing maniac, but with no 
place in the rationalized power-ritual that will be the 
coming peace. She will take her husband’s orders, she will 
become a domestic bureaucrat, a junior partner, and re- 
member Roger, if at all, as a mistake thank God she didn’t 
make. ... Oh, he feels a raving fit co: on—how the 
bloody hell ‘canche sutvive:Qathout herP aie is the British 
warm that protects his stooping shoulders, and the winter- 
ing sparrow he holds inside his hands. She is his deepest 
innocence in spaces of bough and hay before wishes were 


Beyond the Zero 207 


given a separate name to warn that they might not come 
true, and his lithe Parisian daughter of joy, beneath the 
eternal mirror, forswearing perfumes, capeskin to the 
armpits, all that is too easy, for his impoverishment and 
more worthy love. 

You go from dream to dream inside me. You have pas- 
sage to my last shabby comer, and there, among the debris, 
you've found life. I’m no longer sure which of all the words, 
images, dreams or ghosts are “yours” and which are “mine.” 
It’s past sorting out. We're both being someone new now, 
someone incredible. ... 

His act of faith. In the street the children are singing: 

Hark, the herald angels sing: 
Mrs. Simpson’s pinched our King... 


Up on the mantelpiece Sooty’s son Kim, an alarmingly fat 
crosseyed Siamese, lurks waiting to do the only thing he 
enjoys these days. Beyond eating, sleeping or fucking his 
chief obsession is to jump, or topple, on his mother, and 
lie there laughing while she runs screaming around the 
room. Jessica’s sister Nancy comes out of the loo to break 
up what’s becoming a full-scale row between Elizabeth 
and Claire. Jessica steps away from Roger to blow her 
nose, The sound is as familiar to him as a bird’s song, 
ip-ip-ip-ip NGUNNGG as the handkerchief comes away 
: he sooper dooper,” she says, “think I’m catching a 
cold. 

You're catching the War. It’s infecting you and I don’t 
know how to keep it away. Oh. Jess. Jessica. Don’t leave 
TOs 50% 


ae 
Ned, 


PS te 


2 


Un Perm’ au Casino 
Hermann Goering 


You will have the tallest, darkest leading 


man in Hollywood. 
—Merian C. Coorer to Fay Wray 


O 


_ This morning’s streets are already clattering, near and far, 
with woodsoled civilian feet. Up in the wind is a scaveng- 
“ing of gulls, sliding, easy, side to side, wings hung out 
still, now and then a small shrug, only to gather lift for 
this weaving, unweaving, white and slow faro shuffle off 
invisible thumbs. . . . Yesterday’s first glance, coming 
along the esplanade in the afternoon, was somber: the sea 
in shades of gray under under gray clouds, the Casino 
Hermann Goering flat white and the palms in black saw- 
tooth, hardly moving. . But this morning the trees in 
the sun now are back iS green. Leftward, far away, the 
ancient aqueduct loops crumbling, dry yellow, out along 
the Cap, the houses and villas there baked to warm rusts, 
gentle corrosions all through Earth’s colors, pale raw to 
deeply burnished. 
The sun, not very high yet, will catch a bird by the 
ends of his wings, turning the feathers brightly there to 
curls of shaved ice. Slothrop rattles his teeth at the crowd 
of birds aloft, shivering down on his own miniature bal- 
cony, electric fire deep in the room barely touching the 
backs of his legs. They have filed him high on the white 
' sea-facade, in a room to himself. Tantivy Mucker-Maffick 
and his friend Teddy Bloat are sharing one down the hall. 
He takes back his hands into ribbed cuffs of a sweatshirt, 
crosses his arms, watches the amazing foreign morning, 
_the ghosts of his breathing into it, feeling first sunwarmth, 
wanting a first cigarette—and perversely he waits for a 
sudden noise to begin his day, a first rocket. Aware of all 
the time he’s in the wake of a great war gone north, and 
that the only explosions around here will have to be cham- 
-_pagne corks, motors of sleek Hispano-Suizas, the odd 
| amorous slap, hopefully. . . . No London? No Blitz? Can 
he get used to it? Sure, and by then it'll be just time to 
head back. 
“Well, he’s awake? Bloat in uniform, sidling into the 
‘Yoom gnawing on a smoldering pipe, Tantivy behind in 
| a pin-striped lounge suit. “Up at the crack, reconnoitering 
the beach for the unattached mamzelle or two, no 
‘doubt , 
ie) 


211 


212 Gravity's RAInBow 


“Couldn’t sleep,” Slothrop yawning back down into the 
room, birds in the sunlight kiting behind him. 

“Nor we,” from Tantivy. “It must take years to adjust.” 

“God,” Bloat really pushing the forced enthusiasm this 
morning, pointing theatrically at the enormous bed, col- 
lapsing onto it, bouncing vigorously. “They must have had 
advance word about you, Slothrop! Luxury! They gave us 
some disused closet, you know.” ; ; 

“Hey, what are you telling him?” Slothrop forages 
around for cigarettes. “I'm some kind of a Van Johnson 
or something?” 

“Only that, in the matter of,” Tantivy from the balcony 
tossing his green pack of Cravens, “girls, you know—” 

“Englishmen being rather reserved,” Bloat explains, 
bouncing for emphasis. 

“Oh, raving maniacs,” Slothrop mumbles, heading for 
his private lavatory, “been invaded by a gang of those 
section 8s, all right. . . .” Stands pleased, pissing no-hands, 
lighting up, but wondering a little about that Bloat. Sup- 
posed to be oldtime pals with Tantivy. He snaps the 
match into the toilet, a quick hiss: yet something about 
the way he talks to Slothrop, patronizing? maybe ner- 
yous... . 

“You're expecting me to fix you guys up?” he yells over 
the crash of the toilet flushing, “I the minute you 
guys get across that Channel, set foot on that France, you 
all turn into Valentinos.” 

“I hear there was some prewar tradition,” Tantivy hang- 
ing plaintive now in the doorway, “but Bloat and I are 
members of the New Generation, we haye to depend on 
Yank expertise... .” ar 

Whereupon Bloat leaps from the bed and seeks to en- 
lighten Slothrop with a song: errs 

Tae Enuisoman’s Very Say (Fox-tror) 

(Bloat): The Englishman’s very shy, 

He’s none of your Ca-sa-no-va, | 


At bowling the ladies o-ver, 
A-mericans lead the pack— 


(3 
(Tantivy): | —You see, your Englishman tends to lack 
That recklessness transatlantic, 


That women find so romantic 
¥ Though frankly I can’t see why... 


ss 


- 


\ 


4 = Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 213 


(Bloat): © The polygamous Yank with his girls galore 
Gives your Brit-ish rake or carouser fits, 


(Tantivy): _ Though he’s secretly held in re-ve-rent awe 
As a sort of e-rot-ic Clausewitz.... 


(Together): Tf only one could al-ly 
A-merican bedroom know-how 
With British good looks, then oh how 
Those lovelies would swoon and sigh, 
Though you and I know the Englishman’s 
very shy. 


“Well you’ve sure come to the right place,” nods Slo- 
throp, convinced. “Only don’t expect me to put it in for 
you. 

“Just the initial approach,” Bloat says. 

“Moi,” Tantivy has meanwhile been screaming down 
from the balcony, “Moi Tantivy, you know. Tantivy.” 

“Tantivy,” replies a dim girl-chorus from outside and 
below. 

“Jai deux amis, aussi, by an odd coincidence. Par um 
bizarre coincidence, or something, oui?” 

Slothrop, at this point shaving, wanders out with the 
foamy badger brush in his first to see what’s happening, 


-and collides with Bloat, who’s dashing to peer down over 


his compatriot’s left epaulet at three pretty girls’ faces, 
upturned, straw-haloed each by a giant sun-hat, smiles 
all dazzling, eyes mysterious as the sea behind them. 
“T say ou,” inquires Bloat, “ot, you know, déjeuner?” 
“Glad I could help you out,” Slothrop mutters, lathering 


-Tantivy between the shoulderblades, 


“But come with us,” the girls are calling above the 
waves, two of them holding up an enormous wicker 
basket out of which lean sleek green wine bottles and 


, _ Tough-crusted loaves still from under their white cloth 


in little wisps feathering off of chestnut glazes 
and paler split-streaks, “come—sur la plage . . 
“Tl just,” Bloat half out the door, “keep ins company, 
until you . 
“Sur la plage,” Tantivy a bit dreamy, blinking in the 


sun, smiling down at their good-morning’s wishes come 


_ true, “oh, it sounds like a painting. Something by an 
_ Impressionist. A Fauve. Full of light. . . - 


214 Gravity’s RAInsow 


Slothrop goes flicking witch hazel off his hands. The 
smell in the room brings back a moment of Berkshire 
Saturdays—bottles of plum and amber tonics, fly-studded 
paper twists swayed by the overhead fan, twinges of pain 
from blunt scissors. . . . Struggling out of his sweatshirt, 
lit cigarette in his mouth, smoke coming out the neck like 
a volcano, “Hey could I bum one of your—” 

“You've already got the pack,” cries Tantivy—“Cod 
almighty, what is that supposed to be?” 

“What’s what?” Slothrop’s face nothing but innocent as 
he slips into and begins to button the object in question. 

“You're joking, of course. The young ladies are waiting, 
Slothrop, do put on something civilized, there’s a good 
chap—” 

“All set,” Slothrop on the way past the mirror combing 
his hair into the usual sporty Bing Crosby pompadour. 

“You can’t expect us to be seen with—” 

“My brother Hogan sent it to me,” Slothrop lets him 
know, “for my birthday, all the way from the Pacific. See 
on the back? under the fellows in that outrigger canoe 
there, to the left of those hibiscus blossoms, it sez SOUVE- 
NIR OF HONOLULU? This is the authentic item, Mucker- 
Maffick, not some cheap imitation.” 

“Dear God,” moans Tantivy, trailing him forlornly out 
of the room, shading his eyes from the shirt, which glows 
slightly in the dimness of the corridor. “At least tuck it 
in and cover it with something. Here, I'll even lend you 
this Norfolk jacket. . . .” Sacrifice indeed: the. coat is 
from a Savile Row establishment whose fitting rooms are 
actually decorated with portraits of all the venerable - 
sheep—some nobly posed up on crags, others in pensive, 
soft close-ups—from whom the original fog-silvered wool 
was sheared, 

“Must be woven out of that barbed wire,” is Slothrop’s 
opinion, “what girl’d want to get near anything like that?” 

“Ah, but, but would any woman in her right mind want 
to be within ten miles of that-that ghastly shirt, eh?” __ 

“Wait!” From someplace Slothrop now produces a 
gaudy yellow, green and orange display handkerchief, and 
over Tantivy’s groans of horror arranges it in his friend’s 
jacket pocket so as to stick out in three points. “There!” 
beaming, “that’s what you call real — . 


iF 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 215 


They emerge into sunlight. Gulls begin to wail, the gar- 
ment on Slothrop blazes into a refulgent life of its own. 
Tantivy squeezes his eyes shut. When he opens them, the 
girls are all attached to Slothrop, stroking the shirt, nib- 
bling at its collar-points, cooing in French. 

“Of course.” Tantivy picks up the basket. “Right.” 

The girls are dancers. The manager of the Casino Her- 
mann Goering, one César Flebétomo, brought in a whole 
chorus-line soon as the liberators arrived, though he hasn’t 
yet found time to change the place’s occupation name. 
Nobody seems to mind it up there, a pleasant mosaic of 
tiny and perfect seashells, thousands of them set in plaster, 
purple, pink and brown, replacing a huge section of roof 
(the old tiles still lie in a heap beside the Casino), put 
up two years ago as recreational therapy by a Messer- 
schmitt squadron on furlough, in German typeface expan- 
sive enough to be seen from the air, which is what they 
had in mind. The sun now is still too low to touch the 
words into any more than some bare separation from their 
ground, so that they hang suppressed, no relation any 
more to the men, the pain in their hands, the blisters that 
grew black under the sun with infection and blood—only 
receding as the party now walk down past sheets and pil- 
lowcases of the hotel, spread to dry on the slope of the 
beach, fine wrinkles edged in blue that will flow away as 
the sun climbs, six pairs of feet stirring debris never 
combed for, an old gambling chip half bleached by the 
sun, translucent bones of gulls, a drab singlet, Wehrmacht 
issue, torn and blotted with bearing grease. . . . 

They move along the beach, Slothrop’s amazing shirt, 
Tantivy’s handkerchief, girls’ frocks, green bottles all 
dancing, everyone talking at once, boy-and-girl lingua 
franca, the girls confiding quite a lot to each other with 
side glances for their escorts. This ought to be good for 
a bit of the, heh, heh, early paranoia here, a sort of pick- 

_me-up to help face what’s sure to come later in the day. 
But it isn’t. Much too good a morning for that. Little 
waves are rolling in, breaking piecrustwise along a curve 
of dark shingle, farther off foaming among the black rocks 
that poke up along the Cap. Out at sea wink twin slivers 
‘of a boat’s sails being sucked along in the sun and dis- 
_ tance, over toward Antibes, the craft tacking gradual, | 


216 Gravity’s Rainsow 


cockle-frail among low swells whose touch and rowdy hiss 


along the chines Slothrop can feel this morning, reminded 
of prewar Comets and Hamptons sighted from the beach 
at Cape Cod, among land odors, drying seaweed, sum- 
mer-old cooking oil, the feel of.sand on sunburn, the 
sharp-pointed dune grass under bare feet. . . . Closer to 
shore a pédalo full of soldiers and girls moves along— 
they dangle, splash, sprawl in green and white striped 
lounge chairs back aft. At the edge of the water small 
kids are chasing, screaming, laughing in that hoarse, help- 
lessly tickled little-kid way. Up on the esplanade an old 
couple sit on a bench, blue and white and a cream-colored 
parasol, a morning habit, an anchor for the day... . 

They go as far as the first rocks, finding there an inlet 
partly secluded from the rest of the beach, and from the 
looming Casino. Breakfast is wine, bread, smiling, sun dif- 
fracting through the fine gratings of long dancers’ hair, 
swung, flipped, never still, a dazzle of violet, sorrel, saf- 
fron, emerald. , . . For a moment you can let the world 
go, solid forms gone a-fracturing, warm inside of bread 
waiting at your fingertips, flowery wine in long, easy 
passage streaming downward around the root of your 
tongue.... : 

gs cuts in. “I say Slothrop, is she a friend of yours 
too?” 

Hmm? what’s happening ... she, what? Here sits Bloat, 
mg gesturing over at the rocks and a tide pool: near- 


Vee ; 

“You're getting ‘the eye,’ old man.”. 

Well . . . she must have come out of the sea. At this 
distance, some 20 meters, she is only a dim figure in a 
black bombazine frock that reaches 'to her knees, her bare 
legs long and straight, a short hood of bright blonde hair 
keeping her face in shadow, coming up in guiches to 
touch her cheeks, She’s looking-at Slothrop, all right. He 
smiles, sort of waves. She. only continues to stand, the 
breeze pushing at her sleeves. He turns back to draw the 
cork from a wine bottle, and its, pop arrives as a grace 
note for a scream from one of the ers. Tantivy’s 
already halfway to his feet, Bloat gaping out in the girl’s 


direction, the danseuses. snapshot in defense reflexes, hair 


_ flying, frocks twisted, thighs flashing— aos 


ee 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering —-217 


Holy shit it’s moving—an octopus? Yes it is the biggest 
fucking octopus Slothrop has ever seen outside of the 
movies, Jackson, and it has just risen up out of the water 
and squirmed halfway onto one of the black rocks. Now, 
cocking a malignant eye at the girl, it reaches out, wraps 
one long sucker-studded tentacle around her neck as 
everyone watches, another around her waist and begins 
to drag her, struggling, back under the sea. 

Slothrop’s up, bottle in hand, running down past Tan- 
tivy who’s doing a hesitant dance step, hands patting 
lounge-suit pockets for weapons that aren’t there, more 
and more of the octopus revealed the closer he comes 
and wow it’s a big one, holycow—skids to a halt along- 
side, one foot in the tide pool, and commences belting the 
octopus in the head with the wine bottle. Hermit crabs 
slide in death-struggle around his foot. The girl, already 
half in the water, is trying to cry out, but the tentacle, 
flowing and chilly, barely allows her windway enough to 
breathe. She reaches out a hand, a soft-knuckled child’s 
hand with a man’s steel. ID bracelet on the wrist, and 
clutches at Slothrop’s Hawaiian shirt, begins tightening 
her own grip there, and who was to know that among 
her last things would be vulgar-faced hula girls, ukuleles, 
and surfriders all in comic-book colors . . . oh God God 
please, the bottle thudding again and again wetly into 
octopus flesh, no fucking use, the octopus gazes at Slo- 
throp, triumphant, while he, in the presence of certain 
death, can’t quit staring at her hand, cloth furrowing in 
tangents to her terror, a shirt button straining at a single 

, last thread—he sees the name on the bracelet, scratched 

silver letters each one clear but making no sense to him 

before the slimy gray stranglehold that goes tightening, 

liquid, stronger than he and she together, framing the 

- poor hand its cruel tetanus is separating from Earth— 

__ “Slothrop!” Here’s Bloat ten feet away offering him a 
large crab. 

“What th’ fuck . . .” Maybe if he broke the bottle on 
the rock, stabbed the bastard between the eyes— 

. “It’s hungry, it'll go for the crab. Don’t kill it, Slothrop. 
_ Here, for God’s sake—” and here it comes spinning 
_ through the air, legs cocked centrifugally outward: dither- 
_ ing Slothrop drops the bottle just before the crab smacks 


a 


218 Gravity's RAINBOW . 


against his other palm. Neat catch. Immediately, through 
her fingers and his shirt, he can feel the reflex to food. 

“O.K.” Shaking Slothrop waves the crab at the octopus. 
“Chow time, fella.” Another tentacle moves in. Its corru- 
gated ooze touches his wrist. Slothrop tosses the crab a 
few feet along the beach, and what do you know, that 
octopus goes for it all right: dragging along the girl and 
Slothrop staggering for a bit, then letting her go. Slothrop 
quickly snatches up the crab again, dangling it so the 
octopus can see, and begins todance the creature away, 
down the beach, drool streaming from its beak, eyes held 
by the crab. 

In their brief time together Slothrop forms the impres- 
sion that this octopus is not in good mental health, though 
where’s his basis for comparing? But there is a mad ex- 
uberance, as with inanimate objects which fall off of tables 
when we are sensitive to noise and our own clumsiness 
and don’t want them to fall, a sort of wham! ha-ha you 
hear that? here it is again, WHAMI in the cephalopod’s 
every movement, which Slothrop is glad to get away from 
as he finally scales the crab like a discus, with all his 
strength, out to sea, and the octopus, with an eager splash 
and gurgle, strikes out in pursuit, and is presently gone. 

The frail girl lies on the beach, taking in great breaths 
of air, surrounded now by the others. One of the dancers 
is holding her in her arms and speaking, r’s and nasals 
still French, in a language Slothrop, moseying back into 
earshot, can’t quite place. 

Tantivy smiles and flips a small salute. “Good show!” 
cheers Teddy Bloat. “I wouldn’t have wanted to try that 
myself!” 

“Why not? You had that crab. Saaay—where’d you get 
that crab?” 

“Found it,” replies Bloat with a straight face. Slothrop 
stares at this bird but can’t get eye contact. What th’ 
fuck’s going on? 

“I better have some of that wine,” Slothrop reckons. 
He drinks out of the bottle. Air goes splashing upward in 
lopsided spheres inside the green glass. The girl watches 
him. He stops for breath and smiles. ~ 

“Thank you, lieutenant.” Not a tremor in the voice, and 
the accent is Teutonic. He can see her face now, soft nose 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 219 


of a doe, eyes behind blonde lashes full of acid green. One 


of those thin-lipped European mouths. “I had almost 
stopped breathing.” 

“Uh—you're not German.” 

Shaking her head no emphatically, “Dutch.” 

“And have you been here—” 

Her eyes go elsewhere, she reaches, takes the bottle 
from his hand. She is looking out to sea, after the octopus. 
“They are very optical, aren’t they. I hadn’t known. It 
saw me. Me. I don’t look like a crab.” 

“I guess not. You’re a swell-looking lady.” In the back- 
ground, delighted Bloat nudges Tantivy. That recklessness 


’ transatlantic. Slothrop takes her wrist, finds no problem 


now reading that ID bracelet. Sez KATJE BORGESIUS. He 
can feel her pulse booming. Does she know him from 


_ “someplace? strange. A mixture of recognition and sudden 


shrewdness in her face . 
So it is here, grouped 0 on the beach with strangers, that 


_ voices begin to take on a touch of metal, each- word a 


hard-edged clap, and the light, though as bright as before, 
is less able to illuminate .. . it’s a Puritan reflex of seeking 
other orders behind the visible, also known as paranoia, 
filtering in. Pale lines of force whir in the sea air . . . pacts 


- sworn to in rooms since shelled back to their plan views, 


not quite by accident of war, suggest themselves. Oh, 
that was no “found” crab, Ace—no random octopus or 
girl, uh-uh. Structure and detail come later, but the con- 
niving around him now he feels instantly, in his heart. 
They all stay a bit longer on the beach, finishing break- 
fast. But the simple day, birds and sunlight, girls and 
wine, has sneaked away from Slothrop. Tantivy is getting 
drunk, more relaxed and funnier as the bottles empty. 
He's staked out not only the girl he first had his eye on, 
but also the one Slothrop would be no doubt sweet-talking 
right now if that octopus hadn’t shown up. He is a mes- 
senger from Slothrop’s innocent, pre-octopus past. Bloat, 
on the other hand, sits perfectly sober, mustache un- 
ruffled, regulation uniform, watching Slothrop closely. His 


- companion Ghislaine, tiny and slender, pin-up girl legs, 


long hair brushed behind her ears falling all the way down 
~ her back, shifts her round bottom in the sand, writing 
_ marginal commentaries around the text of Bloat. Slothrop, 


220 GRAVITY’S Ratnsow . 


who believes that women, like Martians, have antennas 
men do not, keeps an eye on her. She looks over only 
once, and her eyes grow wide and cryptic. He’d swear she 
knows something. On the way back to the Casino, toting 
their empties, and the basket full of the debris of the 
morning, he manages a word with her. 

“Some picnic, nessay-pah?” 

Dimples appear next to her mouth. “Did you know all 
the time about the octopus? I thought so because it was 
so like a dance—all of you.” 

“No. Honestly, I didn’t. You mean you thought it was 
just a practical joke or something?” 

_ “Little Tyrone,” she whispers suddenly, taking his arm 
with a big phony smile for the others. Little? He’s twice 
her size. “Please—be very careful. . . .” That’s all. He has 
Katje by the other hand, two imps, contrary, either side. 
The beach is empty now except for fifty gray gulls sitting 
watching the water. White heaps of cumulus pose out at 
sea, hard-surfaced, cherub-blown—palm leaves stir, all 
down the esplanade. Ghislaine drops away, back down the 
beach, to pick up prim Bloat. Katje squeezes Slothrop’s 
arm and tells him just what he wants to hear about now: 
“Perhaps, after all, we were meant to meet... .” 


| 


oO 


From out at sea, the Casino at this hour is a blazing bijou 
at the horizon: its foil of palms already shadows in the 
dwindling light. Deepening go the yellowbrown of these 
small serrated mountains, sea colored the soft inside of a 
black olive, white villas, perched chateaux whole and 
ruined, autumn greens of copses and solitary pines, all 
deepening to the nightscape latent across them all day. 
Fires are lit on the beach. A faint babble of English voices, 
and even occasional songs, reaches across the water to 
where Dr. Porkyevitch stands on deck. Below, Octopus 
Grigori, having stuffed himself with crab méat, frisks hap- 
pily in his special enclosure. The reaching, radius of the 
lighthouse on the headland sweeps by, as ty fishing craft. 
head out to sea. Grischa, little friend, you have performed 
your last trick for a while. . . . Is there any hope for 


r 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 221 


further support from Pointsman, now that Porkyevitch and 
His Fabulous Octopus have done their part? 

He gave up questioning orders long ago—even ques- 
tioning his exile. The evidence linking him to the Bukharin 
conspiracy, whose particulars he has never heard, might 
somehow be true—the Trotskyite Bloc might have known 
of him, by reputation, used him in ways forever secret... 
forever secret: there are forms of innocence, he knows, 
that cannot conceive of what that means, much less accept 
it as he has. For it might, after all, be only another epi- 
sode in some huge. pathological dream of Stalin’s, At least 
he had physiology, something outside the party .. . those 
who had nothing but the party, who had built their whole 
lives upon it, only to be purged, must go through some- 
thing very like death . . . and never to know anything for 
certain, never to have the precision of the laboratory . . . 
it’s been his own sanity, God knows, for twenty years. At 
least they can never— 

No, no they .wouldn’t, there’s never been a case... 
unless it’s been hushed up; you’d never read it in the 
journals of course— 

Would Pointsman— 

He might. Yes. 

Grischa, Grischa! It’s come true. On us so quickly: 
foreign cities, comedians in broken hats, cancan «girls, 
fountains of fire, a noisy pit band . . . Grischa, with the 
flags of all the nations curled in your arms .. . fresh shell- 
fish, a warm pirozhok, hot glasses of tea in the evenings, 
between performances . . . learn to forget Russia, to take 
comfort from what mean, falsified bits of her we wander - 
across... 

Now, the sky stretches to admit a single’ first star. But 
Porkyevitch makes no wish. Policy. Signs of arrival do not 
interest him, nor even signs of departure. . .. As the 
boat’s engine goes full ahead, their own wake goes lifting, 
pink with sunset, to obscure the white Casino on shore. 

Electricity is on tonight, the Casino back in France’s 
power grid. Chandeliers shaggy with crystal needles flare 
, overhead, and softer lamps shine among the gardens out- 

side. Going in to dinner with Tantivy and the dancers, 
' Slothrop is brought to a round-eyed halt by the sight of 


222 Graviry’s RaInBow 


Katje Borgesius, hair in one of those emerald tiaras, the 
rest of her rigged out in a long Medici gown of sea-green 
velvet. Her escort’s a two-star general and a brigadier. 

“RHIP,” sings Tantivy, shuffling off sarcastic buffaloes 
along the carpet, “oh, RHIP indeed.” 

“You're trying to get my goat,” Slothrop smiles, “but 
it’s not working.” 

“I can tell.” His own smile freezes. “Oh, no, Slothrop, 
please, no, we’re going in to dinner—” 

“Well, I know we're going in to dinner— 

“No, this is very embarrassing, you've got to take it off.” 

“You like thatP She’s genuine hand-painted! Look! Nice 
tits, huh?” 

“It’s the Wormwood Scrubs School Tie.” 

In the main dining room they merge into a great com- 
ing and going of waiters, officers and ladies. Slothrop, 
young dancer by the hand, caught up in the eddying, 
manages at last to slide with her into a pair of seats just 
vacated: to find who but Katje his left-hand partner. He 
puffs out his cheeks, crosses his eyes, brushes his hair 
industriously with his hands by which time the soup has 
showed up, which he goes at as if disarming a bomb. Katje 
is ignoring him, talking earnestly instead across her general 
with some bird colonel about his prewar profession, man- 
aging a golf course in Cornwall. Holes and hazards. Gave 
one a feel for terrain. But he did like most to be there at 
night, when the badgers came out of their sets to play... « 

By the time the fish has come and gone, something 
funny is happening. Katje’s knee seems to be rubbing 
Slothrop’s, velvet-warm, under the table. 

Weeell, opines Slothrop, watch this: I will employ some 
of that subterfuge, I mean I’m in that Europe, aren’t IP 
He raises his wineglass and announces, ““The Ballad of 
Tantivy Mucker-Maffick.’” Cheers go up, bashful Tantivy 
tries not to smile. It’s a song everyone knows: one of the 
Scotsmen goes dashing down the room to the grand piano, 
César Flebétomo, twirling his slick mustache in a saber- 
point, nips behind a palm in a tub to . the lights up 
a notch, sticks his head back out winking, and hisses for 
his maitre d’hétel. Wine is gargled, thr are cleared 
and a good number of the company commence singing 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 223 


Tue BALLAD oF TANTIVy MuckEer-MaAFFIcK 


Oh Italian gin is a mother’s curse, 

And the beer of France is septic, 

Drinking Bourbon in Spain is the lonely domain 
Of the saint and the epileptic. 

White lightning has fueled up many a hearse 

In the mountains where ridge-runners dwell— 
It’s a brew begot in a poison pot, 

And mulled with the hammers of Hell! 


(Refrain): Oh—Tantivy’s been drunk in many a place, 
From here to the Uttermost Isle, 

And if he should refuse any chance at the booze, 

May I die with an hoary-eyed smile! 


There are what sound like a hundred—but most likely 
only two—Welshmen singing, tenor from the south and 
bass from the north of the country, you see, so that all 
conversation sub rosa or not is effectively drowned out. - 
Exactly what Slothrop wants. He leans in Katje’s direction. 

“Meet me in my room,” she whispers, “306, after mid- 
night.” 

“Gotcha.” And Slothrop is upright in time to join in 
again right on bar one: 


He’s been ossified in oceans of grog, 
In the haunts of the wobbly whale— 
He’s been half-seas over from Durban to Dover, 
Wiv four shaky sheets to the gale. 
For in London fog or Sahara’s sun, 
) Or the icebound steeps of Zermatt, 
Loaded up for a lark to ’is Plimsoll mark 
He’s been game to go off on a bat! 


Yes, Tantivy’s been drunk in many a place... &e. 


_\ After dinner Slothrop gives Tantivy the high-sign. 
_ Their dancers go off arm in arm to the marble lounges 
where the toilet stalls are equipped with a network of 
_ brass voice-tubes, all acoustic, to make stall-to-stall con- 
ie easier. Slothrop and Tantivy head for the nearest 


“Listen,” Slothrop talking into his highball glass, bounc- 


224 Gravity’s Rainsow 


ing words off of ice cubes so theyll have a proper chill, 
“either I’m coming down with a little psychosis here, or 
something funny is going on, right?” 

Tantivy, who is feigning a relaxed air, breaks off hum- 
ming “You Can Do a Lot of Things at the Sea-side That 
You Can’t Do in Town” to inquire, “Ah, yes, do you really — 
think sop” 

“Come on, that octopus.” 

“The devilfish is found quite coseraaaly on Mediter- 
ranean shores. Though usually not so large—is it the size 
that bothers you? Don’t Americans like—” 

“Tantivy, it was no accident. Did you hear that Bloat? 
‘Don’t kill it!’ He had a crab with him, m-maybe inside 
that musette bag, all set to lure that critter away with. 
And where'd he go tonight, anyhow?” 

“I think he’s out on the’ beach, There's a lot of 
drinking. 

“He Sita a lot?” 

“No. »” 

“Look, you’re his friend—” 

Tantivity moans. “God, Slothrop, I don’t know. I'm 
your friend too, but there’s always, you ma a an element. 
of Slothropian paranoia to contend with. . 

“Paranoia’s ass. Something’s up, a-and you ‘now rs a 

Tantivy chews ice, sights along a glass stirring rod, rips 
up a small napkin into a snowstorm, all sorts of bar busi- 
ness, he’s an old hand. But at last, in a soft voice, “Well, 
he’s receiving messages in code.” ~~ 

“Hal” 

“I saw one in his kit this afternoon. Tce: a glimpse. I 
didn’t try to look closer. He is with Supreme Headquar- 
ters, after all—I suppose that could be it.” 

“No, that’s not it. Now what about this—” and Slothrop 
tells about his midnight date with Katje. For a moment 
they might almost be back in the bureau at ACHTUNG, 
and the rockets fons and tea in paper Cue and every- 
thing right again. . 

“Are you going?” 

“Shouldn’t IP You think she’s dangerous?” 

“I think she’s delightful. If I hadn’t Francoise, not to 
mention Yvonne to worry about, I’ = be racing you to her 
door.” . 

» But?” 


~ 


’ Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 225 


But the clock over the bar only clicks once, then pres- 
ently again, ratcheting time minutewise into their past. 

“Either what you've got is contagious,” Tantivy begins, 
“or else they've an eye on me too.” 

They look at each other. Slothrop remembers that ex- 
cept for Tantivy he’s all alone here. “Tell me.” 

“I wish I could. He’s changed—but I couldn’t give you 
a single bit of evidence. It’s been since .. . I don’t know. 
Autumn. He doesn’t talk politics any more. God, we used 
to get into these— He won't discuss his plans after he’s 
demobbed either, it’s something he used to do all the 
time. I thought the Blitz might have got him rattled... 
but after yesterday, I think it must be more. Damn it, 
it makes me sad.” 

“What happened?” 

“Oh. A sort of—not a threat. Or not a serious one. I men- 
tioned, only joking, that I was keen on your Katje. And 
Bloat became very cold, and said, ‘I'd stay clear of that 
one if I were you.’ Tried to cover it with a laugh, as if 
he had his eye on her too. But that wasn’t it. I-I don’t 
have his confidence any more. I’m— I feel I’m only useful 
to him in a way I can’t see. Being tolerated for as long 
as he can use me. The old University connection. I don’t 
know if you ever felt it at Harvard . . . from time to time 
back in Oxford, I came to sense a peculiar structure that 
no one admitted to—that extended far beyond Turl Street, 
‘past Cornmarket into covenants, procuring, accounts due 
. . . one never knew who it would be, or when, or how 
they'd try to collect it . . . but I thought it only idle, 

| aay at the fringes of what I was really up there for, you 

OW... 

“Sure. In that America, it’s the first thing they tell you. 
Harvard’s there for other reasons. The ‘educating’ part of 
it is just sort of a front.” 

“We're so very innocent here, you see.” 

“Some of you, maybe. I’m sorry about Bloat.” 

“T still hope it’s something else.” 

“I guess so. But what do we do right now?” 

“Oh, I'd say—keep your date, be careful. Keep me 
Posted. Perhaps tomorrow I'll have an adventure or two. 
‘to tell you about, for a change. And if you need help,” 
t flashing, face reddening a bit, “well, I'll help you.” 

“Thanks, Tantivy.” Jesus, a British ally. Yvonne and 


= 
i 
ye 


226 Gravity’s Rainsow 


Francoise peek in, beckoning them outside. On to the 
Himmler-Spielsaal and chemin-de-fer till midnight. Slo- 
throp breaks even, Tantivy loses, and the girls win. No sign 
of Bloat, though dozens of officers go drifting in and out, 
brown and distant as rotogravure, through the evening. 
Nor any sight of his girl Ghislaine, Slothrop asks. Yvonne 
shrugs: “Out with your friend? Who knows?” Ghislaine’s 
long hair and tanned arms, her six-year-old face in a 
smile. .. . If it turns out she does know something, is she 
safe? 

At 11:59 Slothrop turns to Tantivy, nods at the two 
girls, tries to chuckle lewdly, and gives his friend a quick, 
affectionate punch in the shoulder. Once, back in prep 
school, just before sending him into a game, young Slo- 
throp’s football coach socked him the same way, giving 
him confidence for at least fifty seconds, till being 
trampled flat on his ass by a number of red-dogging 
Choate boys, each with the instincts and mass of a killer 
rhino. 

“Good luck,” says Tantivy, meaning it, hand already 
reaching for Yvonne’s sweet chiffon bottom. Minutes of 
doubt, yes yes . . . Slothrop ascending flights of red- 
carpeted stairway (Welcome Mister Slothrop Welcome 
To Our Structure We Hope You Will Enjoy Your Visit 
Here), malachite nymphs and satyrs paralyzed in chase, 
evergreen, at the silent landings, upward toward a single 
staring bulb at the top.... . Brig: 

At her door he pauses long enough to comb his hair. 
Now she wears a white pelisse, with sequins all over, 
padded shoulders, jagged white ostrich plumes at the 
neckline and wrists. The tiara is gone: in the electricity 
her hair is new snowfall, But inside a single scented can- 
dle burns, and the suite is washed in moonlight. She pours 
brandy in old flint snifters, and as he reaches, their ge 
touch. “Didn’t know you were .so daffy about that golfl” 
Suave, romantic Slothrop. . ieee 


kind of squinched up, forehead wrinkled. 


“He was pleasant. I was being pleasant to him,” one eye 


Slothrop won- 
ders if his fly’s open. | ' 
“And ignore me. Why?” Clever pounce there, Slo- 
throp—but she only evaporates before the question, re- 
forms in another part of the room. ... 


| 
| 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 227 


“Am I ignoring you?” She’s at her window, the sea 


below and behind her, the midnight sea, its individual 


} 


‘ 


7 


waveflows impossible at this distance to follow, all inte- 
grated into the hung stillness of an old painting seen 
across the deserted gallery where you wait in the shadow, 
forgetting why you are here, frightened by the level of 
illumination, which is from the same blanched scar of 
moon that wipes the sea tonight... . 

“I don’t know. But you're fooling around a lot.” 

“Perhaps I’m supposed to be.” 

“As ‘Perhaps we were meant to meet’?” 

“Oh, you think I’m more than I am,” gliding to a couch, 
tucking one leg under. 

“I know. You're only a Dutch milkmaid or something. 
Closet full o’ those starched aprons a-and wooden shoes, 
right?” 

“Go and look.” Spice odors from the candle reach like 
nerves through the room. _ 

“O.K., I willl” He opens her closet, and in moonlight 
reflected from the mirror finds a crowded maze of satins, 
taffetas, lawn, and pongee, dark fur collars and trimming, 
buttons, sashes, passementerie, soft, confusing, womanly 
tunnel-systems that must stretch back for miles—he could 
be lost inside of half a minute . . . lace glimmers, eyelets 
wink, a crepe scarf brushes his face . . . Aha! wait a 
minute, the operational scent in here is carbon tet, Jack- 
son, and this wardrobe here’s mostly props. “Well. Pretty 
“If that’s a compliment, thank you.” 

Let Them thank me, babe. “An Americanism.” 

“You're the first American I’ve met.” 

“Hmm. You must’ve got out by way of that Amhem, 
then, right?” 

“My, you're quick,” her tone warning him not to go after 
it. He sighs, ringing the snifter with his fingernail. In the 
dark room, with the paralyzed and silent sea at his back, 
he tries singing: 


Too Soon to Know (Fox-rror) 


It’s still too soon, 
It’s not as if we'd kissed and kindled, 
Or chased the moon 


228 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


Through midnight’s hush, as dancing dwindled 
Into quiet seemed 
Over secret lawns . 


Too soon to know 

If all that breathless conversation 
A sigh ago 

Was more than casual flirtation 
Doomed to drift away 

Into misty gray... 


How can we tell, 

What can we see? 

Love works its spells in hiding, 
Quite past our own deciding... 


So who’s to say 

If joyful love is just beginning, 

Or if its day 

Just turned to night, as Earth went spinning? 
Darling, maybe so— 

It’s TOO SOON TO KNOW. 


Knowing what is expected of her, she waits with a 
vapid look till he’s done, mellow close-harmony reeds 
humming a moment in the air, then reaches out a hand, 
melting toward him as he topples in slow-motion toward 
her mouth, feathers sliding, sleeves furling, ascending bare 
arms finely moongrained slipping around and up his back, 
her tacky tongue nervous as a moth, his hands rasping 
over sequins . . ..then her breasts flatten against him as 
her forearms and hands go away folding up behind her 
to find a zipper, bring it snarling down her spineline. .. . 

Katje’s skin is whiter than the white garment she rises 
from. Born again . . . out the window he can almost see 
the spot where the devilfish crawled in from the rocks. 
She walks like a ballerina on her toes, thighs long and 
curving, Slothrop undoing belt, buttons, shoelaces hopping 
one foot at a time, oboy oboy, but the ;moonlight only 
whitens her back, and there is still a dark side, her ventral 
side, her face, that he can no longer see, a terrible beast- 
like change coming over muzzle and Idwer jaw, black 
pupils growing to cover the entire eye space till whites 
are gone and there’s only the red animal reflection when 
the light comes to strike no telling when the light— 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 229 


She has sunk to the deep bed, pulling him along, into 
down, satin, seraphic and floral embroidery, turning im- 
mediately to take his erection into her stretched fork, into 
a single vibration on which the night is tuning .. . as 
they fuck she quakes, body strobing miles beneath him in 
cream and night-blue, all sound suppressed, eyes in cres- 
cents behind the gold lashes, jet earrings, long, octahedral, 
flying without a sound, beating against her cheeks, black 
sleet, his face above her unmoved, full of careful tech- 
nique—is it for her? or wired into the Slothropian Run- 
together they briefed her on—she will move him, she will 
not be mounted. by a plastic shell . ... her breathing has 
grown more hoarse, over a threshold into sound . . . think- 
ing she might be close to coming he reaches a hand into 
her hair, tries to still her head, needing to see her face: 
this is suddenly a struggle, vicious and real—she will not 
surrender her face—and out of nowhere she does begin 
to come, and so does Slothrop. 

For some reason now, she who never laughs has become 
the top surface of a deep, rising balloon of laughter. Later 
as she’s about to go to sleep, she will also whisper, 
”Laughing,” laughing again. 

He will want to say, “Oh, They let you,” but then 
again maybe They don’t. But the Katje he’s talking to is 
already gone, and presently his own eyes have closed. 

Like a rocket whose valves, under remote control, open 
and close at prearranged moments, Slothrop, at a certain 

_ level of his re-entry into sleep, stops breathing through 
his nose and commences breathing through his mouth. 

| This soon grows to snores that have been known to rattle 
storm windows, set shutters to swinging and chandeliers 
into violent tintinnabulation, yes indee-eed. . . . At the 
first of these tonight, Katje wakes up belts him in the head 
with a pillow. 

“None of that.” 


“Tm a light sleeper. Every time you snore, you get hit 
with this,” waving the pillow. 
No kidding, either. The routine of snore, get belted 
with pillow, wake up, say hmm, fall back to sleep, goes 
on well into the morning. “Come on,” finally, “cut it out.” 
__ “Mouth-breather!” she yells. He grabs his own pillow 
_ and swings it at her. She ducks, rolls, hits the deck feint- 


ide 
? 
¥ 

: 


230 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


ing with her pillow, backing toward the sideboard where 
the booze is. He doesn’t see what she has in mind till she 
throws her pillow and picks up the Seltzer bottle. 

The what, The Seltzer Bottle? What shit is this, now? 
What other interesting props have They thought to plant, 
and what other American reflexes are They after? Where’s 
those banana cream pies, eh? 

He dangles two pillows and watches her. “One more 
step,” she giggles. Slothrop dives in goes to hit her across 
the ass whereupon she lets him have it with the Seltzer 
bottle, natch. The pillow bursts against one marble hip, 
moonlight in the room is choked with feathers and down 
and soon with hanging spray from jets of Seltzer. Slothrop 
keeps trying to grab the bottle. Slippery girl squirms 
away, gets behind a chair. Slothrop takes the brandy de- 
canter off of the sideboard, unstoppers it, and flings a 
clear, amber, pseudopodded glob across the room twice 
in and out of moonlight to splash around her neck, be- 
tween her black-tipped breasts, down her flanks. “Bas- 
tard,” hitting him with the Seltzer again. Settling feathers 
cling to their skins as they chase around the bedroom, 
her dappled body always retreating, often in this light, 
even at close range, impossible to see. Slothrop keeps 
falling over the furniture. “Boy, when I get my hands on 
you!” At which point she opens the door to the sitting 
room, skips through, slams it again so Slothrop runs right 
into it, bounces off, sez shit, opens the door to find her 
waving a big red damask tablecloth at him. 

“What's this,” inquires Slothrop. 

“Magic!” she cries, and tosses the tablecloth over him, 
precisely wrinkling ‘folds propagating swift as crystal 
faults, redly through the air. “Watch closely, while I make 
one American lieutenant disappear.” 

“Quit fooling,” Slothrop flailing around yin to reach 
the outside again. “How can I watch closely when I’m in 
here.” He can’t find an edge anyplace and feels a little 
panicky, 

“That's the idea,” suddenly inside, next ‘to him, lips at 
his nipples, hands fluttering among the hairs at the back 
of his neck, pulling him slowly to deep deem “My 
little chickadee.” 

“Where’d you see that one, hey? Remember when he 
gets in bed w-with that gas” is 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 2315) 


“Oh, don’t ask...” This time it is a good-natured 
coordinated quickie, both kind of drowsy, covered with 
sticky feathers . . . after coming they lie close together, 
too liquefied to move, mm, damask and pile, it’s so cozy 
and just as red as a womb in here. . . . Curled holding 
her feet in his, cock nestled in the warm cusp between 
her buttocks, Slothrop trying earnestly to breathe through 
his nose, they drop off to sleep. 

Slothrop wakes to morning sunlight off of that Medi- 
terranean, filtered through a palm outside the window, 
then red through the tablecloth, birds, water running 
' upstairs. For a minute he lies coming awake, no hangover, 

still belonging Slothropless to some teeming cycle of de- 

parture and return. Katje lies, quick and warm, S’d against 
the S of himself, beginning to stir. 

From the next room he hears the unmistakable sound 
of an Army belt buckle. “Somebody,” he observes, catch- 
ing on quickly, “must be robbing my pants.” Feet patter 
by on the carpet, close to his head. Slothrop can hear 
his own small change jingling in his pockets. “Thief!” he 
yells, which wakes up Katje, turning to put her arms 
around him. Slothrop, managing now to locate the hem 
he couldn’t find last night, scoots from under the table- 
cloth just in time to see a large foot in a two-tone shoe, 
coffee and indigo, vanish out the door. He runs into the 
bedroom, finds everything else he had on is gone too, 
down to shoes and skiwvies. 

“My clothes!” running back out past Katje now emerg- 
ing from the damask and making a grab for his feet. 

’ Slothrop flings open the door, runs out in the hall, recol- 
lects that he is naked here, spots a laundry cart and grabs 

a purple satin bedsheet off of it, drapes it around him in 

a sort of toga. From the stairway comes a snicker and the 

pad-pad of crepe soles. “Aha!” cries Slothrop charging 

down the hall. The slippery sheet will not stay on. It 

flaps, slides off, gets underfoot. Up the stairs two at a 

time, only to find at the top another corridor, just as 

empty. Where is everybody? 

From way down the hall, a tiny head appears around 
a corner, a tiny hand comes out and gives Slothrop the 

_ tiny finger. Unpleasant laughter reaches him a split sec- 
ond later, by which time he’s sprinting toward it. At the 
Stairs, he hears footsteps heading down. The Great Purple ° 


} 


232 Graviry’s RaInBow 


Kite races cursing down three flights, out a door and onto 
a little terrace, just in time to see somebody hop over a 
stone balustrade and vanish into the upper half of a thick 
tree, growing up from somewhere below. “Treed at last!” 
cries Slothrop. 

First you have to get into the tree, then you can climb 
it easy as a ladder. Once inside, surrounded by pungent 
leaflight. Slothrop can’t see farther than a couple of limbs. 
The tree is shaking though, so he reckons that that thief 
is in here someplace. Industriously he climbs on, sheet 
catching and tearing, skin stuck by needles, ‘scraped by 
bark. His feet hurt. He’s soon out of breath. Gradually 
the cone of green light narrows, grows brighter. Close to 
the top, Slothrop notes a saw-cut or something partway 
through the trunk, but doesn’t stop to ponder what it 
might mean till he’s reached the very top of the tree and 
clings swaying, enjoying the fine view of the harbor and 
headland, paint-blue sea, whitecaps, storm gathering off 
at the horizon, the tops of people’s heads moving around 
far below. Gee. Down the trunk he hears the sound of 
wood beginning to crack, and feels vibration here in his 
slender perch. 

“Aw, hey .. .” That sneak. He climbed down the tree, 
not up! He’s pe Re there now, watching! . They knew 
Slothrop would choose up, not down—they were count- 
ing on that damned American: reflex all right, bad guy 
in a chase always heads up—why up? and they sawed 
the trunk nearly through, a-and now— 

They? They? 

“Well,” opines Slothrop, “I had better, uh .. .” About 
then the point of the tree cracks through, and eich a great 
rustle and whoosh, a whirl of dark branches and needles 
breaking him up into a few thousand sharp falling pieces, 
down topples Slothrop, bouncing from limb to limb, try- 
ing to hold the purple sheet over his head for a parachute. 
Oof. Nuhh. About halfway to the ground, terrace-level 
or so, he happens to look down, and there observes many 
senior officers in uniform and plump ladies in white batiste 
frocks and flowered hats. They are playing croquet. It 
appears Slothrop will land somewhere in (their midst. He 
closes his eyes and tries to imagine a tropical island, a 
secure room, where this cannot be happening. He opens 
them about the time he hits the ground. In ane: silence, 


ye Fee 
oa 
ta 


_ before he can even register pain, comes the loud thock 
of wood hitting wood. A bright-yellow striped ball comes 
rolling past an inch from Slothrop’s nose and on out of 
sight, followed a second later by a burst of congratula- 
tions, ladies enthusiastic, footfalls heading his way. Seems 
he’s, unnhh, wrenched his back a little, but doesn’t much 
feel like moving anyhow. Presently the sky is obscured 
by faces of some General and Teddy Bloat, gazing curi- 
ously down. 

“It’s Slothrop,” sez Bloat, “and he’s wearing a purple 
sheet.” 

“What’s this my lad,” inquires the General, “costume 
theatricals, eh?” He is joined by a pair of ladies beaming . 
at, or perhaps through, Slothrop. 

“Whom are you talking to, General?” 

“That blighter in the toga,” replies the General, “who 
is lying between me and my next wicket.” 

“Why how extraordinary, Rowena,” turning to her com- 
panion, “do you see a ‘blighter in a toga’?” 

“Goodness no, Jewel,” replies blithe Rowena. “I believe 
the General has been drinking.” The ladies begin to 
giggle. 

“If the General made all his decisions in this state,” 
Jewel grasping for breath, “why there'd, there’d be sauer- 
kraut in the Strand!” The two of them shriek, very loudly, 
for an unpleasant length of time. ; 

“And your name would be Brunhilde,” the two faces 
now a strangled rose, “instead of—of Jewell” They are 
clutching each other for dear life. Slothrop glares up at 
this spectacle, augmented now by a cast of dozens. 

“We-e-e-ell, you see, somebody swiped all my clothes, 
» and I was just on my way to complain to the manage- 
_ ment—” 

“But decided to put on a purple bedsheet and climb 
a tree instead,” nods the General. “Well—I dare say we 
can fix you up with something. Bloat, you're nearly this 
man’s size, aren’t youP” 

_ “Oh,” croquet mallet over his shoulder, posed like an 

advertising display for Kilgour or Curtis, smirking down 

_ at Slothrop, “I’ve a spare uniform somewhere. Come 

Yong Slothrop, you're all right, aren’t you. Didn’t break 

Fr . an : »”> 


og 


_ *Yaagghh.” Wrapped in his tattered sheet, helped to 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 233 


234 Gravity's RAINBOW 


his feet by solicitous croqueteers, Slothrop goes a: Lines 
after Bloat, off the turf and into the Casino. They stop 
first at Slothrop’s room. He finds it newly cleaned, per- 
fectly empty, ready for new guests. “Hey...” Yanking 
out drawers empty as drums: every stitch of clothing 
he owns is gone, including his Hawaiian shirt. What 
the fuck. Groaning, he rummages in the desk. Empty. 
Closets empty. Leave papers, ID, everything, taken. His 
back muscles throb with pain. “What is this, Ace?” going 
to check out the number on the door again, everything 
now for form’s sake. He knows. Hogan’s shirt bothers 
him most of all. 

“First put on something respectable,” Bloat’s tone full 
of headmasterish revulsion. Two subalterns come crashing 
in carrying their valises. They halt goggling at! Slothrop. 
“Here mate, you're in the wrong theatre of operations,” 
cries one. “Show a bit of respect,” the other haw-haws, 
“it’s Lawrence of Arabia!” 

“Shit,” sez Slothrop. Can’t even lift his arm, much less 
swing it. They proceed to Bloat’s room, where they put 
together a uniform. 

“Say,” it occurs to Slothrop, “where’s that Mucker- 
Maffick this morning?” ; 

“Tve no idea, really. Off with his girl. Or girls. 
Where’ve you been?” 

But Slothrop’s looking around, tightening rectal fear 
belatedly taking hold now, neck and face beading in a 
surge of sweat, trying to find in this room Tantivy shares 
with Bloat some trace of his friend. Bristly Norfolk jacket, 
pinstripe suit, anything. ... 

Nothing. “Did that Tantivy move out, or what?” 

“He may have moved in, with Francoise or What’s-her- 
name. Even gone back to London early, I don’t keep a file 
on him, I’m not the meer 7 bureau.” 

“You're his friend. ” Bloat, with an insolent shrug, 
' for the very first time since they met, now looks Slothrop 
in the eyes. “Aren’t you? What are you?” | 

The answer's in Bloat’s stare, the dira room become > 
rationalized, nothing to it of holiday, only Savile Row uni- 
forms, silver hairbrushes and razor arr. ged at right 
angles, a shiny spike on an octagonal base impaling half 
an inch of pastel flimsies, all edges neatly squared ..,@ 
piece of Whitehall on the Riviera. 


*, 


i 


ee 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 235 


Slothrop drops his eyes away. “See if I can find him,” 

_ he mumbles, retreating out the door, uniform ballooning 

at the ass and too tight at the waist. Live wi’ the way it 
feels mate, you'll be in it for a while. ... 

He begins at the bar they talked in last night. It is 
empty except for a colonel with a great twisted mustache, 
with his hat on, sitting stiffly in front of something large, 
fizzing, opaque, and garnished with a white chrysanthe- 
mum. “Didn’t they teach you at Sandhurst to salute?” this 
officer screams. Slothrop, hesitating only a moment, salutes. 
“Damned O.C.T.U. must be full of Nazis.” No bartender 
in sight. Can’t remember what— “Well?” 


“Actually, what I am is, uh, is an American, I-only ~ 


borrowed the uniform, and well I was looking for a 
Lieutenant, or actually Leftenant, Mucker-Maffick. .. .” 
* “You're a what?” roars the colonel, pulling leaves from 
the chrysanthemum with his teeth. “What kind of Nazi 
foolishness is that, eh?” 
“Well, thank you,” Slothrop backing out of the room, 
_ saluting again. 
_ “This is incredible!” the echo following him down the 
corridors to the Himmler-Spielsaal. “It’s Nazi!” 
Deserted in noon’s lull, here are resonant reaches of 
mahogany, green baize, hanging loops of maroon velvet. 
_ Long-handled wood money rakes lie fanned out on the 
tables. Little silyer bells with ebony handles are turned 
mouth-down on the russet veneer, Around the tables, Em- 
_ pire chairs are lined up precise and playerless, But some 
are taller than the rest. These are no longer quite outward 
} and visible signs of a game of chance. There is another 
enterprise here, more real than that, less merciful, and 
_ sytematically hidden from the likes of Slothrop. Who sits 
in the taller chairsP Do They have names? What lies on 
_ Their smooth baize surfaces? 
Brass-colored light seeps in from overhead. Murals line 
_the great room: pneumatic gods and goddesses, pastel 
Swains and shepherdesses, misty foliage, fluttering scarves. 
...Everywhere curlicued gilt festoonery drips—from 
moldings, chandeliers, pillars, window frame... scarred 
Parquetry gleams under the skylight... From the ceiling, 
_ to within a few feet of the tabletops, hang long chains, 
_ with hooks at the ends. What hangs from these hooks? 
_ For a minute here, Slothrop, in his English uniform, is 


236 Gravity's Rainsow 


alone with the paraphernalia of an order whose presence 
among the ordinary debris of waking he has only lately 
begun to suspect. 

There may, for a moment, have been some golden, 
vaguely rootlike or manlike figure beginning to form 
among the brown and bright cream shadows and light 
here. But Slothrop isn’t to be let off so easy. Shortly, un- 
pleasantly so, it will come to him that everything in this 
room is really being used for something different. Meaning 
things to Them it has never meant to us. Never. Two 
orders of being, looking identical... but, but... — 


Oh, THE WORLD OVER THERE, it’s 

So hard to explain! 

Just-like, a dream’s-got, lost in yer brain! 

Dancin’ like a fool through that Forbid-den Wing, 
Waitin’ fer th’ light to start shiver-ing—well, 
Who ev-ver said ya couldn’t move that way, 

Who ev-ver said ya couldn’t try? 

If-ya find-there’s-a-lit-tle-pain, 

Ya can al-ways-go-back-a-gain, cause 

Ya don’t-evy-er-real-ly-say, good-by] 


Why here? Why should the rainbow edges of what is 
almost on him be rippling most intense here in this amply 
coded room? say why should walking in here be almost the 
same as entering the Forbidden itself—here are the same 
long rooms, rooms of old paralysis and evil distillery, of 
condensations and residues you are afraid to smell from 
forgotten corruptions, rooms full of upright gray-feathered 
status with wings spread, indistinct faces in dust—rooms 
full of dust that will cloud the shapes of inhabitants 
around the corners or deeper inside, that will settle on 
their black formal lapels, that will soften to sugar the 
white faces, white shirt fronts, gems and gowns, white 
hands that move too quickly to be seen... what game do 
They deal? What passes are these, so blurred, so old and 
perfect? ! 

“Fuck you,” whispers Slothrop. It’s the only spell he 
knows, and a pretty good all-purpose oe at that. His 
whisper is baffled by the thousands of tiny rococo sur- 
faces. Maybe he'll sneak in tonight—no not at night— 
but sometime, with a bucket and brush, paint ruck you in~ 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 237. 


a balloon coming out the mouth of one of those little pink 
shepherdesses there... . 

He steps back out, backward out the door, as if half, 
his ventral half, were being struck in kingly radiance: re- 
treating from yet facing the Presence feared and wanted. 

Outside, he heads down toward the quay, among fun- 
seekers, swooping white birds, an incessant splat of seagull 
shit. As I walk along the Bwa-deboolong with an inde- 
pendent air... Saluting everybody in uniform, getting it 
to a reflex, don’t ask for extra trouble, try for invisible... 
bringing his arm each time:a bit more stupidly to his side. 
Clouds now are coming up fast, out of the sea. No sign 
of Tantivy out here, either. 

Ghosts of fishermen, glassworkers, fur traders, rene- 


_ gade preachers, hilltop patriarchs and valley politicians 


go avalanching back from Slothrop here, back to 1630 
when Governor Winthrop came over to America on the 
Arbella, flagship of a great Puritan flotilla that year, on 


_ which the first American Slothrop had been a mess cook 


- or something—there go that Arbella and its whole fleet, 


sailing backward in formation, the wind sucking them east 
again, the creatures leaning: from the margins of the un- 
known sucking in their cheeks, growing crosseyed with the 
effort, in to black deep hollows at the mercy of teeth no 
longer the milky molars of cherubs, as the old ships zoom 
out of Boston Harbor, back across an Atlantic whose cur- 
rents and swells go flowing and heaving in reverse...a 


_ redemption of every mess cook who ever slipped and fell 


when the deck made an unexpected move, the night’s stew 
collecting itself up out of the planks and off the indignant 
shoes of the more elect, slithering in a fountain back into 
the pewter kettle as the servant himself staggers upright 
again and the vomit he slipped on goes bushing back into 
the mouth that spilled it... Presto change-o! Tyrone Slo- 
throp’s English again! But it doesn’t seem to be redemp- 
tion exactly that this They have in mind... . 

_ He’s. on a broad cobbled esplanade, lined with palms 
shifting now to coarse-grained black as clouds begin to 
come over the sun. Tantivy isn’t out on the beach, either— 
nor are any of the girls. Slothrop sits'on a low wall, feet 


_ Swinging, watching the front, slate, muddy purple, ad- 


vancing from the sea in sheets, in drifts. Around him the 


- air is cooling. He shivers. What are They doing? 


238 Graviry’s RAINBOW _ 


He gets back to the Casino just as big globular rain- 
drops, thick as honey, begin to splat into giant asterisks 
on the pavement, inviting him to look down at the bottom 
of the text of the day, where footnotes will explain all. He 
isn’t about to look. Nobody ever said a day has to be 
juggled into any kind of sense at day’s end. He just runs. 
Rain grows in wet crescendo. His footfalls send up fine 
flowers of water, each hanging a second behind his flight. 
It is flight. He comes in speckled, pied with rain, begins a 
frantic search through the great inert Casino, starting again 
with the same smoky, hooch-fumed bar, proceeding through 
the little theatre, where tonight will play an abbreviated 
version of L’Inutil Precauzione (that imaginary opera with 
which Rosina seeks to delude her guardian in The Barber of 
Seville), into its green room where girls, a silkenness of 
girls, but not the three Slothrop wants most to see, tease 
hair, arrange garters, glue on eyelashes, smile at Slothrop. 
No one has seen Ghislaine, Francoise, Yvonne. From 
another room the orchestra rehearses a lively Rossini tar- 
antella. The reeds are all something like a half tone flat. 
At once Slothrop understands that he is surrounded by 
women who have lived a good fraction of their lives at war 
and under occupation, and for whom people have been 
dropping out of sight every day...yes, in one or two 
pairs of eyes he finds an old and European pity, a look he 
will get to know, well before he loses his innocence and 
becomes one of them. . 

So he drifts, through ‘the bright sack milling gaming 
rooms, the dining hall and its smaller private satellites, 
busting up téte-a-tétes, colliding with waiters, finding only 
strangers wherever he looks, And if you need help, ie 
Tll help you.... Voices, music, and shuffling of cards all 
grow louder, more oppressive, till he stands looking into 
the Himmler-Spielsaal again, crowded now, jewels flash- 
ing, leather gleaming, roulette spokes whirling blurring— 
it’s here that saturation hits him, it’s all this playing games, 
too much of it, too many games: the nasal, obsessive voice 
of a croupier he can’t see—messieurs, mesdames, les jeux 
sont faits—is suddenly speaking out of, the Forbidden 
Wing directly to him, and about what Slothrop has been 
playing against the invisible House, perhaps after all for 
his soul, all day—terrified he turns, turns out into the rain 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 239 


again where the electric lights of the Casino, in full holo- 


_caust, are glaring off the glazed cobbles. Collar up, Bloat’s 
hat down over his ears, saying shit every few minutes, 
shivering, his back aching from that fall out of that tree, 
he goes stumbling along in the rain. He thinks he might 
begin to cry. How did this all turn against him so fast? 
His friends old and new, every last bit of paper and cloth- 
ing connecting him to what he’s been, have just, fucking, 
vanished. How can he meet this with any kind of grace? 
Only much later, wom out, snuffling, cold and wretched in 
his prison of soggy Army wool, does he think of Katje. 

He gets back to the Casino near midnight, her hour, 
tramping upstairs leaving wet footprints behind, loud as a 
washing machine—stops at her door, rain pattering onto 
the carpet, afraid.even to knock. Has she been taken too? 


_ Who’s waiting behind the door and what machinery have 


They brought with Them? But she’s heard him, and opens 
with a dimpled, chiding smile for being so wet. “Tyrone, 
I missed you.” 

He shrugs, convulsive, helpless, showering both of 
them. “It’s the only place I knew to come.” Her smile 
slowly unpurses. Gingerly he steps across the sill then, not 
sure if it’s door or high window, into her deep room. 


O 


- Good mornings of good old lust, early shutters open to the 


sea, winds coming in with the heavy brushing of palm 


) leaves, the wheezing break to surface and sun of porpoises 


| 


E 


out in the harbor. 

“Oh,” Katje groans, somewhere under a pile of their 
batistes and brocade, “Slothrop, you pig.” 

~ “Oink, oink, oink,” sez Slothrop cheerfully. Seaglare 
dances up on the ceiling, smoke curls from black-market 


_ cigarettes. Given the precisions of light these mornings, 


re are forms of grace to be found in the rising of the 
smoke, meander, furl, delicate fade to clarity. .. . 
_ At certain hours the harbor blue will be reflected up on 
the whitewashed sea-facade, and the tall windows will be 


shuttered again. Wave images will flicker’ there in a 
luminous net. By then Slothrop will be up, in British uni- 


240 ; Graviry’s RaINsow — 


form, gobbling down croissants and coffee, already busy 
at a refresher course in technical German, or trying to 
dope out the theory of arrow-stable trajectories, or tracing 
nearly with the end of his nose some German circuit sche- 
matic whose resistors look like coils, and the coils like 
resistors—“What bizarre shit,” once he got hep to it, “why 
would they go and switch it around like that? Trying to 
camouflage it, or what?” 

“Recall your ancient German runes,” suggests Sir Ste- 
phen Dodson-Truck, who is from the Foreign Office P.I.D. 
and speaks 33 languages including English with a strong 
Oxonian blither to it. 

“My what?” 

“Oh,” lips compressing, some kind of brain nausea 
here, “that coil symbol there happens to be very like the 
Old Norse rune for ‘S,’ sél, which means ‘sun.’ The Old 
High German name for it is sigil.” 

“Funny way to draw that sun,” it seems to Slothrop. 

“Indeed. The Goths, much earlier, had used a circle 
with a dot in the center. This broken line evidently dates 
from a time of discontinuities, tribal fragmenting perhaps, 
alienation—whatever’s analogous, in a social sense, to the 
development of an independent ego by the very young 
child, you see. 

Well, no, Slothrop doesn’t see, not ceantty. He hears 
this sort of thing from Dodson-Truck nearly every time 
they get together. The man just materialized one day, out 
on the beach in a black suit, shoulders starred with dan- 
druff from thinning carrot hair, coming into view against 
the white face of the Casino, which trembled over him as 
he approached. Slothrop was reading a Plasticman comic. 
Katje was dozing in the sun, face-up. But when his foot- 
pads reached her hearing, she turned on one elbow to 
wave hello. The peer flung himself to full length, Attitude 
ae 1, Torpor, Undergraduate. “Sa this is Lieutenant Slo- 

op 

“ea Plasticman goes oozing fst of a keyhole, 
around a comer and up through piping that leads to a 
sink in the mad Nazi scientist’s lab, out of whose faucet 
Plas’s head now, blank carapaced eyes and unplastic iow? 
is just emerging. “Yeah. Who’re you, Ace? 

Sir Stephen introduces himself, freckles roused by the! 


> on 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 241 


- sun, eyeing the comic book curiously. “I gather this isn’t 
a study period.” 

“Is he cleared?” ; 

“He’s cleared,” Katje smiling/shrugging at Dodson- 
Truck. j 

“Taking a break from that Telefunken radio control. That 
‘Hawaii I.’ You know anything about that?” 

“Only enough to wonder where they got the name 
from.” 

“The name?” 

“There’s a poetry to it, engineer’s poetry... it suggests 
Haverie—average, you know—certainly you have the two 
lobes, don’t you, symmetrical about the rocket’s intended 
azimuth ... hauen, too—smashing someone with a hoe or 

aclub...” off on a voyage of his own here, smiling at no 
one in particular, bringing in the popular wartime expres- 
sion ab-hauen, quarterstaff technique, peasant humor, 

_ phallic comedy dating back to the ancient Greeks.... 
Slothrop’s first impulse is to get back to what that Plas is 

' into, but something about the man, despite obvious mem- 
bership in the plot, keeps him listening... an innocence, 
maybe a try at being friendly in the only way he has avail- 

_ able, sharing what engages and runs him, a love for the 
Word. 

“Well, it might be just Axis propaganda. Something to 
do with that Pearl Harbor.” 

Sir Stephen considers this, seeming pleased. Did They 

choose him because of all those word-smitten Puritans 
dangling off of Slothrop’s family tree? Were They trying 
to seduce his brain now, his reading eye too? There are 
times when Slothrop actually can find a clutch mechanism 
between him and Their iron-cased engine far away up a 
| power train whose shape and design he has to guess at, a 
clutch he can disengage, feeling then all his inertia of 
motion, his real helplessness... it is not exactly unpleas- 
ant, either. Odd thing. He is almost sure that whatever 
They want, it won’t mean risking his life, or even too much 
of his comfort. But he can’t fit any of it into a pattern, 
there’s no way to connect somebody like Dodson-Truck 
with somebody like Katje.... 
_. Seductress-and-patsy, all right, that’s not so bad a 
game. There’s very little pretending. He doesn’t blame her: 


"4 


242 Graviry’s Ratnsow 


the real enemy’s somewhere back in that London, and this 
is her job. She can be versatile, gay, and kind, and he'd 
rather be warm here with her than freezing back under 
the Blitz. But now and then... too insubstantial to get a 
fix on, there'll be in her face a look, something not in her 
control, that depresses him, that he’s even dreamed about 
and so found amplified there to honest fright: the terrible 
chance that she might have been conned too. As much a 
victim as he is—an unlucky, an unaccountably futureless 
look. ... 

One gray afternoon in where but the Himmler-Spielsaal, 
where else, he surprises her alone by a roulette wheel. 
She’s standing, head bent, gracefully hipshot, playing 
croupier. An employee of the House. She wears a white 
peasant blouse and a rainbow-striped dirndl skirt of satin, 
which shimmers underneath the skylight. The ball’s tattoo, 
against the moving spokes, gathers a long, scratchy reso- 
nance here in the muraled ‘space. She doesn’t turn till Slo- 
throp is beside her. To her breathing there is a grave 
slow-beating tremor: she nudges at the shutters of his 
heart, opening to him brief flashes of an autumn country 
he has only suspected, only feared, outside him, inside 
her.... 

“Hey Katje...” Making a long arm, hooking a finger 
on a spoke to stop the wheel, The ball drops in a com- 
partment whose number they never see. Seeing the num- 
ber is supposed to be the point. But in the game behind 
the game, it is not the point. 

She shakes her head. He understands that it’s something 
back in Holland, before Arnhem—an impedance per- 
manently wired into the circuit of themselves. How many 
ears smelling of Palmolive and Camay has he crooned 
songs into, outside-the-bowling-alley songs, behind-the- 
Moxie-billboard songs, Saturday-night open-me-another- 
quart songs, all saying, honey, it don’t matter where you've 
been, let’s not live in the past, right now’s all there is.... 

Fine for back there. But not in here, tapping on her 
bare shoulder, peering in at her European darkness, be- 
wildered with it, himself with his straight hair barely comb- 
able and shaven face without a wrinkle such a chaste in- 
trusion in the Himmler-Spielsaal all crowded with Ger- 
man-Baroque perplexities of shape (a sacrament of hands 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 243 


in every last turn each hand must produce, because of 
what the hand was, had to become, to make it all come out 
exactly this way... all the cold, the trauma, the departing 
flesh that has ever touched it. ...) In the twisted gilt play- 
ing-room his secret motions clarify for him, some. The 
odds They played here belonged to the past, the past only. 
Their odds were never probabilities, but frequencies al- 
ready observed. It’s the past that. makes demands here. 
It whispers, and reaches after, and, sneering disagreeably, 
gooses its victims. 

When They chose numbers, red, black, odd, even, what 

‘did They mean by it? What Wheel did They set in motion? 

Back in a room, early in Slothrop’s life, a room forbidden 
to him now, is something very bad, Something was done 
to him, and it may be that Katje knows what. Hasn’t he, in 
her “futureless look,” found some link to his own past, 
something that connects them closely as lovers? He sees 
her standing at the end of a passage in her life, without 
any next step to take—all her bets are in, she has only the 
tedium now of being knocked from one room to the next, 
a sequence of numbered rooms whose numbers do not 
matter, till inertia brings her to the last. That’s all. 

Naive Slothrop never thought anybody’s life could end 
like that. Nothing so bleak. But by now it’s grown much 

less strange to him—he’s been snuggling up, masturbatorily 
scared-elated, to the disagreeable chance that exactly such 
Control might already have been put over him. 

The Forbidden Wing. Oh, the hand of a terrible crou- 
pier is that touch on the sleeves of his dreams; all in his 
life of what has looked free or random, is discovered to’ve 
been under some Control, all the time, the same as a fixed 

Toulette wheel—where only destinations are important, 
attention is to long-term statistics, not individuals: and 
pre the House always does, of course, keep turning a 
profit... 

__ “You were in London,” she will presently whisper, tum- 
ing back to her wheel and spinning it again, face averted, 
‘womanly twisting the night-streaked yarn of her past, 
“while they were coming down. I was in ’s Graven- 
hage”—fricatives sighing, the name spoken with exile’s 
lingering—‘“while they were going up. Between you and 

‘the is not only a rocket trajectory, but also a life. You will 


y 


. 
se 
or 
a 


244 Gravity’s Rainsow 


come to understand that between the two points, in the 
five minutes, it lives an entire life. You haven't even 
learned the data on our side of the flight profile, the visible 
or trackable. Beyond them there’s so much more, so much 
none of us know.. 

But it is a curve each of them feels, unmistakably. It is 
the parabola. They must have guessed, once or twice— 
guessed and refused to believe—that everything, always, 
- collectively, had been moving toward that purified shape 
latent in the sky, that shape of no surprise, no second 
chances, no return. Yet they do move forever under it, 
reserved for its own black-and-white bad news certainly as 
if it were the Rainbow, and they its children. ... 

As the War’s front moves away from them, and the 
Casino becomes more and more a rear area, as the water 
grows more polluted and the prices rise, so the personnel 
coming down on leave get noisier and more dedicated to 
pure assholery—none of Tantivy’s style about them, his 
habit of soft-shoe dancing when drunk, his make-believe 
foppishness and shy, decent impulses to conspire, however 
marginally, whenever possible, against power and indiffer- 
ence.... There hasn’t been a word about him. Slothrop 
misses him, not just as an ally, but as a presence, a kind- 
ness. He continues to believe, here on his French leave, 
and at his ease, that the interference is temporary and 
paper, a matter of messages routed and orders cut, an 
annoyance that -will end when the War ends, so well have 
They busted the sod prairies of his brain, tilled and sown 
there, and subsidized him not to grow anything of his 
own.... 

No letters from London, not even news of ACHTUNG. 
All gone. Teddy Bloat one day just vanished: other con- 
spirators, like a chorus line, will show up off and on be- 
hind Katje and Sir Stephen, dancing in, all with identical 
Corporate Smiles, the multiplication of whose glittering 
choppers is to dazzle him, they think, distract him from 
what they’re taking away, his ID, his service dossier, his 
past. Well, fuck... you know. He lets it happen. He’s 
more interested, and sometimes a little anxious, about 
what they seem to be adding on. At some point, appar- 


ently on a whim, though how can a fellow be sure, Slo- 


throp decides to raise a mustache. Last mustache he had 


_ 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 245 


“was at age 13, he sent away to that Johnson Smith for a 

whole Mustache Kit, 20 different shapes from Fu Manchu 
to Groucho Marx. They were made of black cardboard, 
with hooks that fit into your nose. After a while snot would 
soak into these hooks, and they’d grow limp, and the 
mustache would fall off. 

“What kind?” Katje wants to know, soon as this one is 
visible. 

“Bad-guy,” sez Slothrop. Meaning, he explains, trimmed, 
narrow, and villainous. 

“No, that'll give you a negative attitude. Why not raise 
a good-guy mustache instead?” 

“But good guys don’t have—” 

“Oh no? What about Wyatt Earp?” 

To which one might’ve advanced the objection that 
Wyatt wasn’t all that good. But this is still back in the 
Stuart Lake era here, before the revisionists moved in, and 
Slothrop believes in that Wyatt, all right. One day a Gen- 
eral Wivern,; of SHAEF Technical Staff, comes in and sees 
it. “The ends droop down,” he observes. 

“So did that Wyatt’s,” explains Slothrop. ; 

“So did John Wilkes Booth’s,” replies the general. “Eh?” 

Slothrop ponders. “He was a bad guy.” 

“Precisely. Why don’t you twist the ends up?” 

“You mean English style. Well, I tried that: It must be 
the weather or something, the old duster just keeps 
droopin’ down again, a-and I need to bite those ends off. 

It’s really annoying.” 

__ “It’s disgusting,” sez Wivern. “Next time I come round 
I shall bring you some wax for it. They make it with a 
bitter taste to discourage, ah, end-chewers, you know.” 

_.__ So as the mustache waxes, Slothrop waxes the mustache. 
Every day there’s something new like this. Katje’s always 
there, slipped by Them into his bed like nickels under the 
pillow for his deciduous Americanism, innocent incisors ’n’ 
Momworshiping molars just left in a clattering trail back 
down these days at the Casino. For some odd reason he 
finds himself with hardons right after study sessions. Hm, 
that’s peculiar. There is nothing specially erotic about 
reading manuals hastily translated from the German— 
brokenly mimeographed, even a few salvaged by the 
Polish underground from the latrines at the training site 


246 Gravity’s Rainsow 


at Blizna, stained with genuine SS shit and piss...or 
memorizing conversion factors, inches to centimeters, 
horsepower to Pferdestirke, drawing from memory sche- 
matics and isometrics of the snarled maze of fuel, oxidizer,’ 
steam, peroxide and permanganate lines, valves, vents, 
chambers—what’s sexy about that? still he emerges from 
each lesson with great hardon, tremendous pressure in- 
side... some of that temporary insanity, he reckons, and 
goes looking for Katje, hands to crabwalk his back and 
silk stockings squealing against his hipbones. ... 

During the lessons he will often look over and catch 
Sir Stephen Dodson-Truck consulting a stopwatch and 
taking notes. Jeepers. He wonders what that’s all about. 
Never occurs to him it might have to do with these mys- 
terious erections. The man’s personality was chosen—or 
designed—to sidetrack suspicions before they have a 
chance to gather speed. Winter sunlight hitting half his 
face like a migraine, trouser cuffs out of press, wet and 
sandy because he’s up every morning at six to walk along 
the strand, Sir Stephen makes perfectly accessible his dis- 
guise, if not his function in the conspiracy. For all Slo- 
throp knows he’s an agronomist, a brain surgeon, a concert 
oboist—in that London you saw all levels of command 
seething with these multidimensional geniuses, But as with 
Katje, there hangs about Dodson-Truck’s well-informed 
zeal an unmistakable aura of the employee and loser. . . . 

One day Slothrop gets a chance to check this out. Seems 
Dodson-Truck is a chess fanatic. Down in the bar one 
afternoon he gets around to asking Slothrop if he plays. 

“Nope,” lying, “not even checkers.” REN 

“Damn. I’ve hardly had time till now for a good game.” 

“I do know a game,” has something of Tantivy been 
sheltering inside all this time? “a drinking game, it’s called 
Prince, maybe the English even invented it, cause you have 
those princes, rightP and we don’t, not that that’s wrong 
understand, but everybody takes a number, a-and you 
start off the Prince of Wales has lost his tails, no offense 
now, the numbers going clockwise around the table, and 
number two has found them, clockwise from that Prince, 
or whatever number he wants to call out actually, he, 
that’s the Prince, six or anything, see, you pick a Prince 
first, he starts it off, then that number two, or whoever 


a 


is Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 247 


that Prince called, sez, but first he goes, the Prince does, 
Wales, tails, two sir, after saying that about how that 
Prince of Wales has lost his tails, and number two answers, 
not I, sir—”’ - 

' “Yes yes but—” giving Slothrop a most odd look, “I 
mean I'm not quite sure I really see, you know, the point 
to it all. How does one win?” 

Hal How does one win, indeed. “One doesn’t win,” 
easing into it, thinking of Tantivy, one small impromptu 
counter-conspiracy here, “one loses. One by one. Who- 
_ ever's left is the winner.” 

“It sounds rather negative.” 

“Garcon.” Drinks here are always on the house for 
Slothrop—They are springing for it, he imagines. “Some 
of that champagne! Wantcha to just keep it coming, and 
any time we run out, go get more, comprendez?” Any 
. number of slack-jawed subalterns, hearing the magic word, 
drift over and take seats while Slothrop explains the 

es. 

“Tm not sure—” Dodson-Truck begins. 

“Baloney. Come on, do you good to get outa that chess 
rut,” 

“Right, right,” agree the others. 

Dodson-Truck stays in his seat, a bit tense. 

“Bigger glasses,” Slothrop hollers at the waiter. “How 
about those beer mugs over there! Yeah! They'd be just 
fine.” The waiter unblasts a jeroboam of Veuve Clicquot 
Brut, and fills everybody up. 

“Well, the Prince 0’ Wales,” Slothrop commences, “has 
lost his tails, and number three has found them. Wales, 
tails, three sir!” 

.. “Not I, sir,” replies Dodson-Truck, kind of defensive 
about it. 

“Who, sir?” 

“Five, sir.” 

“Say what?” inquires Five, a Highlander in parade 
trews, with a sly look. 

“You fucked up,” commands princely Slothrop, “so you 
got to drink up. All the way now, ’n’ no stopping to breathe 

or anything.” 
On it goes. Slothrop loses Prince position to Four, and 
all the numbers change. The Scot is first to drop, making 


‘a 
ee" ‘ 


by ein 


248 Gravity’s Ratnsow 


mistakes at first deliberate but soon inevitable. Jeroboams 
come and go, fat, green, tattered gray foil at the necks 
giving .back the bar’s electric radiance. Corks grow 
straighter, less mushroomy, dates of degorgement move 
further into thé war years as the company gets drunker. 
The Scot has rolled chuckling from his chair, remaining 
ambulatory for some ten feet, where he goes to sleep 
against a potted palm. At once another junior officer slides 
beaming into his place. The word has osmosed out into 
the Casino, and there is presently a throng of kibitzers 
gathered around the table, waiting for casualties. Ice is 
being hauled in by the giant block, fern-faulted inside, 
breathing white off of its faces, to be sledged arid chipped 
into a great wet tub for the procession of bottles being run 
up from the cellar now in relays. It soon becomes neces- 
sary for the harassed waiters to stack empty tankards in 
pyramids and pour fountain-style from the top, the bubble- 
shot cascades provoking cheers from the crowd. Some 
joker is sure to reach in and grab one of the mugs on the 
bottom, sending the whole arrangement swaying, every- 
body else jumping to salvage what they can before it all 
comes down, crashing, soaking uniforms and shoes—so 
that it can be set up all over again. The game has switched 
to Rotating Prince, where each number called out imme- 
diately becomes Prince, and all the numbers shift accord- 
ingly. By this time it is impossible to tell who’s making 
mistakes and who isn’t. Sasso arise. Half the room. 
are singing a vulgar song: 
VuLGAR SONG 

Last night I poked the Queen of Trsglen ti, 
' Tonight Ill poke the Queen of Burgundee— 

I'm bordering on the State of Schizophren-ia, 

But Queenie is so very nice to me. 

It’s pink champagne and caviar for break- a 

A spot of Chateaubriand wiv me tea— 
* Ten-shilling panatelas now are all that I can smoke, 

I laugh so much you'd think the world was' just a silly joke, 
So call me what you will, m’ lads, but make way for. the — 
bloke ; 

That’s poked the love-ly lit-tle Queen of Transyl-vaayn-yaal | 


peg. 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 249 


 Slothrop’s head is a balloon, which rises not vertically but 
horizontally, constantly across the room, whilst staying in 
one place. Each brain cell has become a bubble: he’s been 
transmuted to black Epernay grapes, cool shadows, noble 
cuvées. He looks across at Sir Stephen Dodson-Truck, who 
is still miraculously upright though with a glaze about the 
eyes. Aha, right, s:posed to be counter-conspiring here, yes 
yes uh, now... he gets involved watching another pyra- 
midal fountain, this time of sweet Taittinger with no date 
on the label. Waiters and off-duty dealers sit like birds 
along the bar, staring. Noise in the place is incredible. A 
Welshman with an accordion stands on a table playing 
“Lady of Spain,” in C, just zooming up and down that 
wheezebox like a maniac. Smoke hangs thick and swirling. 
Pipes glow in the murk. At least three fist-fights are in 
progress. The Prince game is difficult to locate any more. 
Girls crowd at the door, giggling and pointing. The light 
in the room has gone bear-brown with swarming uniforms. 
Slothrop, clutching his tankard, struggles to his feet, spins 
around once, falls with a crash into a floating crown-and- 
anchor game. Grace, he warns himself: grace.... Rois- 
terers pick him up by the armpits and back pockets, and 
fling him in the direction of Sir Stephen Dodson-Truck. 
He makes his way on under a table, a lieutenant or two 
falling over him on route, through the odd pond of spilled 
bubbly, the odd slough of vomit, till he finds what he 
imagines to be Dodson-Truck’s sand-filled cuffs. 
“Hey,” getting himself threaded among the legs of a 
chair, angling his head up to locate Dodson-Truck’s face, 
haloed by a hanging fringe-shaded lamp. “Can you walk?” - 
Carefully swinging his eyes down on Slothrop, “Not 
sure, actually, that I can stand. .. .” They spend some time 
at the business of untangling Slothrop from the chair, then 
standing up, which is not without its complications—locat- 
ing the door, aiming for it.... Staggering, propping each 
other up, they push through a bottle-wielding, walleyed, 
unbuttoned, roaring, white-faced and stomach-clutching 
mob, in among the lithe and perfumed audience of girls at 
the exit, all sweetly high, a decompression lock for the 
outside. 
» “Holy shit.” This is the kind of sunset ‘you hardly see any 
more, a 1gth-century wilderness sunset, a few of which 


250 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


got set down, approximated, on canvas, landscapes of the 
American West by artists nobody ever heard of, when the 
land was still free and the eye innocent, and the presence 
of the Creator much more direct. Here it thunders now 
over the Mediterranean, high and lonely, this anachronism 
in primal red, in yellow purer than can be found any- 
where today, a purity begging to be polluted .. . of course 
Empire took its way westward, what other way was there 
but into those virgin sunsets to penetrate and to foul? 

But out at the horizon, out near the burnished edge of 
the world, who are these visitors standing . .. these robed 
figures—perhaps, at this distance, hundreds of miles tall— 
their faces, serene, unattached, like the Buddha’s, bending 
over the sea, impassive, indeed, as the Angel that stood 
over Liibeck during the Palm Sunday raid, come that day 
neither to destroy nor to protect, but to bear witness to a 
game of seduction. It was the next-to-last London took 
before her submission, before that liaison that would bring 
her at length to the eruption and scarring of the wasting 
pox noted on Roger Mexico’s map, latent in this love she 
shares with the night-going rake Lord Death... because 
sending the RAF to make a terror raid against civilian 
Liibeck was the unmistakable long look that said hurry up 
and fuck me, that brought the rockets hard and screaming, 
the A4s, which were to’ve been fired anyway, a bit sooner 
instead. ... i 

What have the watchmen of world’s edge come tonight 
to look for? deepening on now, monumental beings, stoical, 
on toward slag, toward ash the color the night will stabilize 
at, tonight... what is there grandiose enough to witness? 
only Slothrop here, and Sir Stephen, blithering along, 
crossing shadow after long prison-bar shadow cast by the 
tall trunks of palms lining the esplanade. The spaces be- 
tween the shadows are washed a véry warm. sunset-red 
now, across grainy chocolate beach. There seems to be 
nothing happening of any moment. No traffic whispering 
in the circular driveways, no milliards of franes being 
wagered because of a woman or an entente of nations at. 
any of the tables inside. Only the somewhat formal weep- 
ing of Sir Stephen, down now on one a in the sand still. 
warm from the day: soft and strangled cries of despair 
held in, so testifying to all the repression he ever under- 
went that even Slothrop can feel, in his own throat, sympa- 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 251 


thetic flashes of pain for the effort it is clearly costing the 

“Oh yes, yes you know, I, I can’t. No. I assumed that 
you knew—but then why should they tell you? They all 
know. I'm an office joke, The people even know. Nora’s 
been the sweetheart of the psychic crowd for years and 
years. That’s always good for some bit of copy in the 
News of the World—” 

“Oh! Yeah! Nora—that’s that dame that was caught 
that time with the kid who-who can change his color, 
right? Wow! Sure, that Nora Dodson-Truck! I knew your 
name was familiar— 

But Sir Stephen has gone on: “...had a son, yes we 
came complete with sensitive son, boy about your age. 
Frank...I think they sent him to Indo-China. They're 
very polite when I ask, very polite but, they won't let me 
find out where he is.... Theyre good chaps at Fitzmau- 
rice House, Slothrop. They mean well. It’s been, most of 
it’s been my fault.... I did love Nora. I did. But there 
were other things.... Important things, I believed they 
were. I still do. I must. As she got along, you know... 
they do get that way. You know how they are, demanding, 
always trying to-to drag you into bed. I couldn’t,” shaking 
his head, his hair now incandescent orange in this twi- 
light, “I couldn’t. fd climbed too far. Another branch. 
Couldn’t climb back down to her. She-she might even 
have been happy with a, even a touch now and then. . 
Listen Slothrop, your girl, your Katje, sh-she’s very lovely, 


«e 


“Th-they think I don’t care, any more. ‘You can observe 
-without passion, Bastards...No I didn’t mean that.. 
Slothrop, we're all such mechanical men. Doing our jobs. 
That’s all we are. Listen—how do you think I feel? When 
youre off with her after every lesson. I’m an impotent 
man—all I have to look forward to is a book, Slothrop. 
A report to write...” 

“Hey, Ace—” 

“Don’t get angry. I'm harmless. Go ahead hit me, Ill 
_only fall over and bounce right up again. Watch.” He 
demonstrates. “I care about you, both of you. I do care, 
believe me, Slothrop.” 

“O.K. Tell me what’s going on.” 


4 


ve 


ee 


? 


252 Gravity’s RAINBOW _ 


“I care!” 

“Fine, fine...” 

“My ‘function’ is to observe you. That’s my function. 
You like my function? You like it? Your ‘function’... is, 
learn the rocket, inch by inch. I have... to send in a daily 
log of your progress. And that’s all I know.” 

But that’s not all. He’s holding something back, some- 
thing deep, and fool Slothrop is too drunk to get at it with 
any kind of style. “Me and Katje too? You looking through 
the keyhole?” 

Sniffing, “What difference’s it make? I’m the perfect 
man for it. Perfect. I can’t even masturbate half the 
time ...no nasty jissom getting all over their reports, you 
know. Wouldn’t want that. Just a neuter, just a recording 
eye.... They're so cruel. I don’t think they even know, 
really... . They aren’t even sadists. .. . There’s just no pas- 
sion at all... .” 

Slothrop puts a hand on his shoulder. The suit padding 
shifts and bunches over the warm bone beneath it. He 
doesn’t know what to say, what to do: himself, he feels 
empty, and wants to sleep.... But Sir Stephen is on his 
knees, just about, quaking at the edge of it, to tell Slo- 
throp a terrible secret, a fatal confidence concerning: | 


Tue Pents He THoucur Was His Own 


(lead tenor); "Twas the penis, he thought-was, his own— 
Just a big playful boy of a bone... 


With a stout purple head, 
Sticking up from the bed, 
Where the girlies all played Telephone— 
(bass): Te-le-phone.... 
(inner voices): | But They came through the hole in the 
night, 8 ic’ 
(bass): BEE oe sweet-talked it clear out of 
sight— 
(inner voices): Out of sight... |- 
(tenor); Now he sighs all alone, 
With a heartbroken moan, | 
For the pe-nis, he thought-was, his, 


owwwwnl 
(inner voices): Was, his, ownl 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 253 


The figures out to sea have been attending, growing 
now even more windy and remote as the light goes cold 
_ and out..., They are so difficult to reach across to—diffi- 
cult to grasp. Carroll Eventyr, trying to confirm the Liibeck 
angel, learned how difficult—he and his control Peter 
Sachsa. both, floundering in the swamp between the 
worlds, Later on, in‘'London, came the visit from that most 
ubiquitous of double agents, Sammy Hilbert-Spaess, whom 
everyone had thought in Stockholm, or was at Paraguay? 

“Here then,” the kindly scombroid face scanning Even- 
tyr, quick as a fire-control dish antenna and even less 
mercy, “I thought 'd—” 

“You thought you’d just check in.” 

“Telepathic too, God he’s amazing i’n’t he.” But’ the 
fishy eyes will not let up. It is a rather bare room, the 
address behind Gallaho Mews ordinarily reserved for cash 
transactions. They have summoned Eventyr up from “The 
White Visitation.” They know in London how to draw 

- pentacles too, and cry conjurations, how to bring in exactly 
the ones they want.... The tabletop is crowded with 
glasses, smudged, whitish, emptied or with residues of 
deep brown and red drinks, with ashtrays and with debris 
from artificial fowers which old Sammy here has been. 
plucking, unpeeling, twisting into mysterious curves and 
knots. Train-smoke blows in a partly opened window. 
One wall of the room, though blank, has been eroded at, 
over years, by shadows of operatives, as certain mirrors in 
public easing-places have been by the images of custom- 
ers: a surface gathering character, like an old face. . 

“But then you don’t actually talk to him,” ah, Sammy's 
so good at this, softly-softly, “I mean it’s none of your 
telegraphers in the middle of the night having a bit of a 

__ chat sort of thing. . 

‘ ~ “No. No.” Eventyr. understanding now that they’ve been 

seeing transcripts of everything that comes through from 

_ Peter Sachsa—that what Eventyr himself gets to read is 

already censored. And that it may have been this way for 

a while now.... So relax, grow passive, watch for a shape 

to develop out ‘of Sammy's talking, a shape that really 

_Eventyr knows already, as we do working out acrostics— 
he’s called up to London, but they aren’t asking to be put 
in touch with anyone, so it’s Sachsa himself they're in- 


254 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


terested in, and the purpose of this meeting is not to 
commission Eventyr, but to warn him. To put a part of his 
own hidden life under interdiction. Bits, tones of voice, 
choices of phrasing now come flying together: “. . . must’ve 
been quite a shock to find himself over there... had a 
Zaxa or two of me own to worry about... keep you out of 
the street at least... see how you're holding up, old Zaxa 
too of course, need to filter out personalities you see from 
the data, easier for us that way... .” 

Out of the street? Everyone knows how Sachas died. 
But no one knows why he was out there that day, what 
led up to it. And what Sammy is telling Eventyr here is: 
Don’t ask. 

Then will they try to get to Nora too? If there are 
analogies here, if Eventyr does, somehow, map on to Peter 
Sachsa, then does Nora Dodson-Truck become the woman 
Sachsa loved, Leni Pékler? Will the interdiction extend to 
Nora’s smoky voice and steady hands, and is Eventyr to be 
kept, for the duration, perhaps for his life, under some 
very sophisticated form of house arrest, for crimes that 
will never be told himP 

Nora still carries on her Adventure, her “Ideology of 
the Zero,” firm among the stoneswept hair of the last 
white guardians at the last stepoff into the black, into the 
radiant. ... But where will Leni be now? Where will she 
have wandered off to, carrying her child, and her dreams 
that will not grow up? Either we didn’t mean to lose her— 
either it was an ellipsis in our care, in what some of us 
will even swear is our love, or someone has taken her, 
deliberately, for reasons being kept secret, and Sachsa’s 
death is part of it too. She has swept. with her wings 
another life—not husband Franz, who dreamed of, prayed 
for exactly such a taking but instead is being kept for 
something quite different—Peter Sachsa, who was passive 
in a different way...is there some mistake? Do They - 
never make mistakes, or... why is he here rushing with 
her toward her own end. (as indeed Eventyr has been — 
sucked along in Nora’s furious wake) her body blocking — 
from his sight everything that lies ahead, 'the slender girl — 
strangely grown oaken, broad, maternal . \. all he has to” 
go by is the debris of their time sweeping in behind from — 
either side, looping away in long helices, into the dusty i 

4 


Ni 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 255 


invisible where a last bit of sunlight lies on the stones of - 


the road.... Yes: however ridiculously, he is acting out 
Franz Pékler’s fantasy for him, here crouched on her back, 
very small, being taken: taken forward into an aether-wind 
whose smell... no not that smell last encountered just be- 
fore his birth... the void long before he ought to be 
remembering ... which means, if it’s here again... then 
eeathenstes 

They are being pushed: backward by a line of police. 
Peter Sachsa is jammed inside it, trying to keep his foot- 


_ ing, no escape possible...Leni’s face moving, restless, 


against the window of the Hamburg Flyer, concrete roads, 
pedestals, industrial towers of the Mark flying away at 


_ over a hundred miles an hour the perfect background, 


brown, blurred, any least mistake, in the points, in the 
roadbed at this speed and they’re done for... her skirt is 
pulled up in back, the ei bottoms of her thighs, marked 
red from the train seat, tum toward him... yes...in 
the imminence of disaster, yes, whoever’s watching yes. Sal 
“Leni, where are you?” She was at his elbow not ten 
seconds ago. They'd agreed beforehand to try and keep 
together. But there are two sorts of movement out here— 
as often as the chance displacements of strangers, across a 
clear skirmish-line from the Force, will bring together 
people who'll remain that way ; for a time, in love that can 
even make the oppression seem a failure, so too love, here 
in the street, can be taken centrifugally apart again: faces 
seen for the last time here, words spoken idly, over your 
shoulder, taking for granted she’s there, already last - 
words—“Will Walter be bringing wine tonight? I forgot 
to—” it’s a private joke, his forgetting, going around in 
some adolescent confusion, hopelessly in love too by now 
with the little girl. She is his refuge from society, parties, 
clients .. . often she is his sanity. He’s taken to sitting for 
a little while each night beside her bed, late at night, 
watching her sleep, with her bottom up in the air and 
face in the pillow...the purity, the rightness of it... 


But her mother, in her own sleep, grinds her teeth often 
these nights, frowns, talks in a tongue he cannot admit he 
might, some time or place, know and speak fluently. Just 


in this past week... what does he know of politics? but 


the can see that she has crossed a threshold, found a 


256 Gravity's RaInsow 


istekiehiieg of the time, where he might not be able to 
follow— 

“You're her mother... what if they arrest you, what 
happens to her?” 

“That’s what they—Peter ‘can’t you see, they want a 
great swollen tit with some atrophied excuse for a human, 
bleating around somewhere in its shadows. How can I be 
human for her? Not her mother. ‘Mother,’ that’s a civil- 
service category, Mothers work for Them! They're the 
policemen of the soul...” her face darkened, Judaized by 
the words she speaks, not because it’s out loud but be- 
cause she means it, and she’s right. Against her faith, 
Sachsa can see the shallows of his own life, the bathtub 
stagnancy of those soirees where for years not even the 
faces changed . . . too many tepid years. . 

“But I love you...” she brushes halve back from his 
sweating forehead, they lie beneath a window through 
which street- and advertising-light blow constantly, lap- 
ping at their skins, at their roundings and shadows, with 
spectra colder than those of the astrologers’ Moon.... 

“You don’t have to be anything you aren’t, Peter. I 
wouldn’t be here if I didn’t love who you are. . 

Did she goad him into the street, was she the death of 
him? In his view from the other side, no. In love, words 
can be taken too many ways, that’s all, But he does sake 
he was sent across, for some particular reason. .. . 

And Ilse, vamping him with her dark eyes, She can say 
his name, but often, to flirt with him, she won't, or she'll 
call him Mama. 

“No-no, that’s Mama. I’m Peter. Remember? Peter.” 

“Mama.” 

Leni only gazes, a smile held between her lips almost, 
he must say, smug, allowing the mix-up in names to fall, 
- to set up male reverberations she can’t be ignorant of. If 
she doesn’t want him out in the street, why does she se 
keep her silence at such momentsP 

“I was only glad she wasn’t calling viie\Meima,? Leni 
thought she’d explain. But that’s too close to ideology, it’s 
nothing he can be comfortable with yet. | He doesn’t know 
how to listen to talk like that as more than slogans strung 
together: hasn’t learned to hear with the revolutionary 
heart, won't ever, in fact, be given enough time to ati 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 257 


a revolutionary heart from the bleak comradely love of 
the others, no, no time for it now, or for anything but one 
more breath, the rough breath of a man growing afraid 
in the street, not even enough time to lose his fear in the 
time-honored way, no, because here comes Schutzmann 
Joche, truncheon already in backswing, the section of 
Communist head moving into view for him stupidly, so 
unaware of him and his power... the Schutzmann’s first 
clear shot all day ...oh, his timing is perfect, he feels it 
in arm and out the club no longer flabby at his side but 
tensed back now around in a muscular curve, at the top 
of his swing, peak of potential energy... far below that 
gray vein in the man’s temple, frail as parchment, standing 
out so clear, twitching already with its next to last pulse- 
beat... and, SHIT! Oh—how— 

How beautiful! 

During the night, Sir Stephen vanishes from the Casino. 

But not before telling Slothrop that his erections are of 
high interest to Fitzmaurice House. 

Then in the morning Katje comes storming in madder 
than a wet hen, to tell Slothrop that Sir Stephen’s gone. 
Suddenly everybody is telling Slothrop things, and he’s 
barely awake. Rain rattles at the shutters and windows. 
Monday mornings, upset stomachs, good-bys ... he blinks 
out at the misted sea, the horizon mantled in gray, palms 
gleaming in the rain, heavy and wet and very green. It 
may be that the champagne is still with him—for ten 
extraordinary seconds there’s nothing in his field but simple 
love for what he’s seeing. 

Then, perversely aware of it, he turns away, back into 
the room. Time to play with Katje, now.... 

Her face is as pale as her hair. A rain-witch. Her hat 
brim makes a chic creamy green halo around her face. 

“Well, he’s gone then.” Keenness of this order might 
work to provoke her. “It’s too bad. Then again—maybe 
it’s good.” 

“Never mind him. How much do you know, Slothrop?” 

“What’s that mean, never mind him? What do you do, 
just throw people away?” 

“Do you want to find out?” 

He stands twisting his mustache. “Tell me about it.” 


* 


258 Gravity’s RAinsow © 


“You bastard. You’ve sabotaged the whole thing, with 
your clever little collegiate drinking game.” 

“What whole thing, Katje?” 

“What did he tell you?” She moves a step closer. Slo- 
throp watches her hands, thinking of army judo instructors 
he’s seen. It occurs to him he’s naked and also, hmm, 
seems to be getting a hardon here, look out, Slothrop. Aud 
nobody here to note it, or speculate why. . 

“Sure didn’t tell me you knew any of ‘that judo. Must 
of taught you it in that Holland, huh? Sure—little things,” 
singing in | descending childish thirds, “give you away, you 
know. . 

“Aahh—” exasperated she rushes in, aims a chop at his 
head which he’s able to dodge—goes diving in under her 
arm, lifts her in a fireman’s carry, throws her against the 
bed and comes after her. She kicks a sharp heel at his 
cock, which is what she should’ve done in the first place. 
Her timing, in fact, is drastically off all through this, else 
she would likely be handing Slothrop’s ass to him... it 
may be that she wants her foot to miss, only scraping 
Slothrop along the leg as he swerves now, grabs her by 
the hair and twists an arm behind her, pushing her, face- 
down, on the bed. Her skirt is up over her ass, her thighs 
squirming underneath him, his penis in terrific erection. 

“Listen, cunt, don’t make me lose my temper with you, 
got no problems at all hitting women, I'm the Cagney of 
the French Riviera, so look out.” 

“TH kill you—” 

“What—and sabotage the whole thing” 

Katje turns her head and sinks her teeth in his forearm, 
up near the elbow where the Pentothal needles used to go 
in. “Ow, shit—” he lets go the arm he’s been twisting, pulls 
down underwear, takes her by one hip and pentrates her 
from behind, reaching under to pinch nipples, paw at her 
clitoris, rake his nails along inside her thighs, Mister Tech- 
nique here, not that it matters, theyre both ready to 
come—Katje first, screaming into the pillow, Slothrop a 
second or two later. He lies on top of her, sweating, taking 
great breaths, watching her face turned | 8), away, not even. 
a profile, but the terrible Face That Is Ng Face, gone too 
abstract, unreachable: the notch of eye socket, but never 
the labile eye, only the anonymous curve of cheek, con-_ 


‘ i 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 259 


' vexity of mouth, a noseless mask of the Other Order of 
Being, of Katje’s being—the lifeless nonface that is the 
only face of hers he really knows, or will ever remember. 

“Hey, Katje,” ’s all he sez. 

“Mm.” But here’s only her old residual bigeiiess again, 
and they are not, after all, to be lovers in parachutes of 
sunlit voile, lapsing gently, hand in hand, down to any- 
thing meadowed or calm. Surprised? 

She has moved away, releasing his cock into the cold 
room. “What’s it like in London, SlothropP When. the 
rockets come down?” 

“What?” After fucking he usually likes to lie around, 
just smoke a cigarette, think about food, “Uh, you don’t 
_ know it’s there till it’s there. Gee, till after it’s there. If it 
doesn’t hit you, then you're O.K. till the next one. If you 
hear the explosion, you know you must be alive.” 

“That’s how you know you're alive.” 

“Right.” She sits up, pulling underpants back up and 
skirt back down, goes to the mirror, starts rearranging her 
hair. “Let’s hear the boundary-layer temperatures. While 
youre getting dressed.” 

“Boundary-layer temperature T sub e, what is this? 
rises exponentially till Brennschluss, around 70 miles 
range, a-and then there’s a sharp cusp, 1200 degrees, then 
it drops a little, minimum of 1050, till you get out of the 
atmosphere, then there’s another cusp at 1080 degrees. 
Stays pretty steady till re-entry,” blablabla. The bridge 
music here, bright with xylophones, is based on some old 
favorite that will comment, ironically but gently, on what 
is transpiring—a tune such as “School Days, Schoo! Days,” 
or “Come, Josephine, in My Flying Machine,”. or even 
“There'll Be a HOT TIME in the Old Town Tonite!” take 
your pick—slowing and fading to a glassed-in porch down- 
stairs, Slothrop and Katje téte-a-téte, alone except for a 
number of musicians in the corner groaning and shaking 
their heads, plotting how to get César Flebétomo to pay 
them for a change. Bad gig, bad gig. ... Rain bats against 

_glass, lemon and myrtle trees qutside.shake <r the 
wind. Over croissants, strawberry jam, real butter, real. 
_ coffee, she has him running. through the flight profile in 
_ terms of wall temperature and Nusselt heart-transfer 
_ coefficients, computing in his head from Reynolds num- 


260 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


bers she flashes him... equations of motion, damping, 
restoring moments ... methods of computing Brennschluss 
by IG and radio methods . .. equations, transformations... 

“Now jet expansion angles. [ll give you altitude, you 
tell me the angle.” 

“Katje, why don’t you tell me the angle?” 

She was pleased, once, to think of a peacock, courting, 
fanning his tail... she saw it in the colors that moved in 
the flame as it rose off the platform, scarlet, orange, 
iridescent green... there were Germans, even SS troops, 
who called the rocket Der Pfau. “Pfau Zwei.’ Ascending, 
programmed in a ritual of love...at Brennschluss it is 
done—the Rocket’s purely feminine counterpart, the zero 
point at the center of its target, has submitted. All the rest 
will happen according to laws of ballistics. The Rocket is 
helpless in it. Something else has taken over. Something 
beyond what was designed in. 

Katje has understood the great airless arc as a clear 
allusion to certain secret lusts that drive the planet and 
herself, and Those who use her—over its peak and down, 
plunging, burning, toward a terminal orgasm... which is 
certainly nothing she can tell Slothrop. 

They sit listening to gusts of rain that’s’ nearly sléet. 
Winter gathers, breathes, deepens. A roulette ball goes 
rattling, somewhere back in another room. She’s running. 
Why? Has he come too close again? He tries to remember 
if she always needed to talk this way, in draw-shots, re- 
bounding first before she could touch him. Fine time to 
start asking. He’s counter-conspiring in the dark, jimmying 
doors at random, no telling what'll come out. . 

Dark basalt pushes up out of the sea. A Vaporous scrim 
hangs across the headland and its chateaux, turning it all to 
a grainy antique postcard. He touches her hand, moves 
his fingers up her bare arm, reaching. . 

“Fim Py 

“Come on upstairs,” sez Slothrop. 

She may have hesitated, but so briefly| that he didn’t 
notice: “What have we been talking os all this time?” 

“That A4 rocket.” 

She looks at him for a long time. At first he thinks she’s 
about to laugh at him. Then it looks like shel cry. He 
doesn’t understand. “Oh, Slothrop. No. You don’t want 


‘Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 261 


me. What they're after may, but you don’t. No more than 
A4 wants London. But I don’t think they know... about 
other selves... yours or the Rocket’s...no. No more than 
you do. If you can’t understand it now, at least remember. 
That’s all I can do for you.” 

They go back up to her room again: cock, cunt, the - 
Monday rain at the windows. ... Slothrop spends the rest 
of the morning and early afternoon studying Professors 

- Schiller on regenerative cooling, Wagner on combustion 
equations, Pauer and Beck on exhaust gases and burning 
efficiency. And a pornography of blueprints. At noon the 
rain stops. Katje is off on chores of “her own. Slothrop 
passes a few hours downstairs in the bar, waiters who 
catch his eye smiling, holding up bottles of champagne, 
wiggling them invitingly—“No, merci, non....” He's 
trying to memorize the organization charts at that Peene- 
miinde. 

As light begins to spill from the overcast sky, he and 
Katje are out taking a walk, an end-of-the-day stroll along 
the esplanade. Her hand is gloveless and icy in his, her 
narrow black coat making her taller, her long silences help- 
ing to thin her for him nearly to fog.... They stop, lean 
against a railing, he watching the midwinter sea, she the 
blind and chilly Casino poised behind them. Colorless 
clouds slide by, endlessly, in the sky. 

- “I was thinking of the time I came in on you. That after- 
noon.” He can’t quite bring himself to get specific out 
loud, but she knows he means the Himmler-Spielsaal. 

She has looked around sharply. “So was I.” 

!. Their breaths are torn into phantoms out to sea. She 
has her hair combed high today in a pompadour, her fair 

eyebrows, plucked to wings, darkened, eyes rimmed in 

black, only the outboard few lashes missed and left 
blonde. Cloudlight comes slanting down across her face, 
taking away color, leaving little more than a formal snap- 
shot, the kind that might appear on a oon ute 

“A-and you were so far away then...I coulda’t reach 


you. 

Then. Sosmething like pity comes into her face and goes 
again. But her whisper is lethal and bright as sudden wire: 
\ “Maybe you'll find out. Maybe i in one of their bombed-out 
Cities beside one of their rivers or forests, even one day in 


262 Gravitry’s RAINBOW 


the rain, it will come to you. You'll remember the Himmler- 
Spielsaal, and the skirt I was wearing...memory will 
dance for you, and you can even make it my voice saying 
what I couldn’t say then. Or now.” Oh what is it she smiles 
here to him, only for that second? already gone. Back to 
the mask of no luck, no future—her face’s rest state, pre- 
ferred, easiest. ... 

They are standing among black curly skeletons of iron 
benches, on the empty curve of this esplanade, banked 
much more steeply than the waking will ever need: vertig- 
inous, trying to spill them into the sea and be rid of this. 
The day has grown colder. Neither of them can stay bal- 
anced for long, every few seconds one or the other must 
find a new footing. He reaches and turns up the collar of 
her coat, holds her cheeks then in his palms. . . is he trying 
to bring back the color of fleshP He looks down trying to 
see into her eyes, and is puzzled to find tears coming up 
to fill each one, soaking in among her lashes, mascara 
bleeding out in fine black swirls... translucent stones, 
trembling in their sockets. ... 

Waves crash and drag at the stones of the beach. The 
harbor has broken out in whitecaps, so brilliant they can’t 
be gathering their light from this drab sky. Here it is again, 
that identical-looking Other World—is he gonna have this 
to worry about, now? What th’—lookit these trees—each 
long frond hanging, stung, dizzying, in laborious drypoint 
against the sky, each so perfectly placed. ... 

She has moved her thighs and the points of her hips up 
to touch him, through her coat—it might still, after all, be 
to help bring him back—her breath a white scarf, her tear- 
trails, winter-lit, ice. She feels warm. But it’s not enough. 
Never was—nope, he understands all right, she’s been 
meaning to go for a long time. Braced for the wind the 
whitecaps imply, or for the tilt of the pavement, they hold 
each other. He kisses her eyes, feels his cock again begin 
to swell with good old, bad old—old, anyhow—lust. 

Out at sea a single clarinet begins to play, a droll melody 
joined in on after a few bars by guitars and mandolins. 
Birds huddle bright-eyed on the beach. Katje’s heart light- 
ens, a little, at the sound. Slothrop doesn’t yet have the 
European reflexes to clarinets, he still thinks of Benny 
Goodman and not of clowns or circuses—but wait... 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 263 


aren't these kazoos coming? Yeah, a lotta kazoos! A Kazoo 
Band! 

Late that night, back in her room, she wears a red gown 

of heavy silk. Two tall candles burn an indefinite distance 

behind her. He feels the change. After making love she 
lies propped on an elbow watching him, breathing deep, 
dark nipples riding with the swell, as buoys ride on the 
white sea. But a patina has formed on her eyes: he can’t 
even see her accustomed retreat, this last time, dimmed, 
graceful, to the corner of some inner room.... 

“Katje.” 

“Sshh,” raking dreamy fingernails down the morning, 
over the Céte d’Azur toward Italy. Slothrop wants to sing, 
decides to, but then can’t think of anything that’d work. 
He reaches an arm, without wetting his fingers snuffs the 
candles. She kisses the pain. It hurts even more. He falls 
asleep in her arms. When he wakes she is gone, com- 

pletely, most of her never-worn clothes still in the closet, 
blisters and a little wax on his fingers, and one cigarette, 
stubbed out before its time in an exasperated fishhook. ... 
She never wasted cigarettes. She must have sat, smoking, 
watching him while he slept... until something, he'll 
never be asking her what, triggered her, made it impossible 
to stay till cigarette’s end. He straightens it out, finishes 
it, no point wasting smokes is there, with a war on.... 


Oo 


“Ordinarily in our behavior, we react not singly, but 
-complexly, to fit the ever present contents of our environ- 
ment. In old people,” Pavlov was lecturing at the age of 

83, “that matter is altogether different. Concentrating on 

one stimulus we exclude by negative induction other col- 

lateral and simultaneous stimuli because they often do not 
suit the circumstances, are not complementary reactions 
in the given setting.” 


~ Thus [Pointsman never shows these excursions of his to 
dy anyone], reaching for some flower on my table, 
~ Iknow the cool mosaic of my room 
Begin its slow, inhibitory dissolve 


3 


264 Gravity's Rainsow 


Around the bloom, the stimulus, the need 

That brighter burns, as brightness, quickly sucked 
From objects all around, now concentrates 

( Yet less than blinding), focuses to flame. 

Whilst there yet, in the room’s hypnotic evening, 
The others lurk—the books, the instruments, 

The old man’s clothes, an old gorodki stick, 

Glazed now but with their presences. Their spirits, 
Or memories I kept of where they were, 

Are canceled, for this moment, by the flame: 

The reach toward the frail and waiting flower... 
And so, one of them—pen, or empty 

Is knocked from where it was, perhaps to roll 
Beyond the blank frontiers of memory... 

Yet this, be clear, is no “senile distraction,” 

But concentrating, such as younger men 

Can easily and laughing dodge, their world 
Presenting too much more than one mean loss— 
And out here, eighty-three, the cortex slack, 
Excitatory processes eased:'to cinders _ 

By Inhibition’s tweaking, callused fingers, 

Each time my room begins its blur I feel 

I’ve looked in on some city’s practice blackout 
(Such as must come, should Germany keep on 
That road of madness). Each light, winking out . 
Except at last for one bright, stubborn bloom ' 

The Wardens cannot quench, Or not this time. 


The weekly briefings at “The White Visitation” are all 
but abandoned. Hardly anyone sees the old Brigadier 
about these days. There is evidence of a budgetary in- 
security begun to filter in among the cherub-crusted halls 
and nooks of the PISCES facility. 

“The old man’s funking,” cries Myron Grunton, none 
too stable himself these days. The Slothrop group are 
gathered for their regular meeting in the ARF wing. “He'll 
shoot down the whole scheme, all it'll take is one bad 
Lay 

A degree of well-bred panic can be observed among 
those present. In the background, laboratory assistants 
move about cleaning up dog shit and eltiiied instru- 
ments. Rats and mice, white and black ard a few shades 
of gray, run clattering on their wheels in a\ hundred cages. 
- Pointsman is the only one here maintaining his calm. 
He appears unruffled and strong. His lab coats have even 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 265 


begun lately to take-on a Savile Row serenity, suppressed 
waist, flaring vents, finer material, rather rakishly notched 
lapels. In this parched and fallow time, he gushes affluence. 
After the baying has quieted down at last, he speaks, 
soothing: “There’s no danger.” 
“No danger?” screams Aaron Throwster, and the lot of 
them are off again muttering and growling. 
“Slothrop’s knocked out Dodson-Truck and the girl in 
one day!” 
“The whole thing’s falling apart, Pointsman!” 
“Since Sir Stephen came back, Fitzmaurice House has 
‘dropped out of the scheme, and there’s been embarrassing 
inquiries down from Duncan Sandys—” 
“That's the P.M.’s son-in-law, Pointsman, not good, not 
good!” is 
“We've already begun to run into a deficit—” 
“Funding,” IF you can keep your head, “is available, 
and will be coming in before long... certainly before we 
run into any serious trouble. Sir Stephen, far from being 
‘knocked out,’ is quite happily at work in Fitzmaurice 
House, and is At Home there should any of you wish to 
confirm. Miss Borgesius is still active on the program, and 
Mr. Duncan Sandys is having all his questions answered. 
But best of all; we are budgeted well into fiscal ’46 be- 
fore anything like a deficit begins to rear its head.” 
“Your Interested Parties again?” sez Rollo Groast. 
“Ah, I noticed Clive Mossmoon from Imperial Chemicals 
closeted with you day before yesterday,” Edwin Treacle 
,mentions now. “Clive and I took an organic chemistry 
course or two together back at Manchester. Is ICI one of 
our, ah, sponsors, Pointsman?” 
“No,” smoothly, “Mossmoon, actually, is working out of 
_ Malet Street these days. I'm afraid we were up to nothing 
more sinister than a bit of routine coordination over this 
Schwarzkommando business.” 
“The hell you were. I happen to know Clive’s at ICI, 
managing some sort of polymer research.” 
They stare at each other. One is lying, or bluffing, or 
both are, or all of the above. But whatever it is Pointsman 
has a slight advantage. By facing squarely the extinction 
‘of his program, he has gained a great bit of Wisdom: that 
if there is a life force operating in Nature, still there is 


ee 
> 


266 Graviry’s RAINBOW - 


nothing so analogous in a bureaucracy. Nothing so mysti- 
cal. It all comes down, as it must, to the desires of in- 
dividual men. Oh, and women too of course, bless their 
empty little heads. But survival depends on having strong 
enough desires—on knowing the System better than the 
other chap, and how to use it. It’s work, that’s all it is, and 
there’s no room for any extrahuman anxieties—they only 
weaken, effeminize the will: a man either indulges them, 
or fights to win, und so weiter. “I do wish ICI would 
finance part of this,” Pointsman smiles. 

“Lame, lame,” mutters the younger Dr, Groast. 

“What’s it matter?” cries Aaron Throwster. “If the old 
man gets moody at the wrong time this whole show can 
prang.” 

“Brigadier Pudding will not go back on any of his 
commitments,” Pointsman very steady, calm, “we have 
made arrangements with him. The details aren’t im- 
portant.” 

They never are, in these meetings of his. Treacle has 
been comfortably sidetracked onto the Mossmoon Issue, 
Rollo Groast’s carping asides never get as far as serious 
opposition, and are useful in presenting the appearance of 
open discussion, as are Throwster’s episodes of hysteria 
for distracting the others.... So the gathering breaks up, 
the conspirators head off for coffee, wives, whisky, sleep, 
indifference. Webley Silvernail stays behind to secure his 
audiovisual gear and loot the ashtrays. Dog Vanya, back 
for the moment in an ordinary state of mind if not of kid- 
neys (which are vulnerable after a while to bromide 
therapy), has been allowed a short break from the test 
stand, and he goes sniffing now over to the cage of Rat 
Ilya. Ilya puts his muzzle against the galvanized wire, and 
the two pause this way, nose to nose, life and life.... 
Silvernail, puffing on a hook-shaped stub, lugging a 16 mm 
projector, leaves ARF by way of a long row of cages, 
exercise wheels strobing under the fluorescent lights. Care- 
ful youse guys, here comes da screw. Aw he’s O.K. Looie, 
he’s. a regular guy. The others laugh. Den what’s he doin’ 
in here, huh? The long white lights buzz overhead. Gray- 
smocked assistants chat, smoke, linger at various routines. 
Look out, Lefty, dey’re comin’ fer you dis time. Watch dis, 
chuckles Mouse Alexei, when he picks me up I'm gonna 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 267 


shit, right’n his hand! Better not hey, ya know what hap- 
_ pened ta Slug, don’tchaP Dey fried him when he did dat, 
man, da foist time he fucked up runnin’ dat maze. A 
hundrit volts. Dey said it wuz a “accident.” Yeah... sure 
it wuz! 

From overhead, from a German camera-angle, it occurs 
to Webley Silvernail, this lab here is also a maze, i’n’t it 
now ... behaviorists run these aisles of tables and consoles 
just like rats ‘n’ mice. Reinforcement for them is not a 
pellet of food, but.a successful experiment. But who 
watches from above, who notes their responses? Who hears 
the small animals in the cages as they mate, or nurse, or 
communicate through the gray quadrilles, or, as now, begin 
to sing... come out of their enclosures, in fact, grown to 
Webley Silvernail-size (though none of the lab people 
seem to be noticing) to dance him down the long aisles 

and metal apparatus, with conga drums and a peppy tropi- 
a orchestra taking up the very popular beat and melody 
of: 


Paviovia (BEGUINE) 


It was spring in Pavlovia-a-a, 
I was lost, ina maze... 
Lysol breezes perfumed the air, 
Id been searching for days. 
I found you, in a cul-de-sac, 
’ As bewildered as I— 
We touched noses, and suddenly 
My heart learned how to fly! 


So, together, we found our way, 
Shared a pellet, or two... 
Like an evening in some café, 
Wanting nothing, but you... 


Autumn’s come, to Pavlovia-a-a, 
Once again, I’m alone— 

Finding sorrow by millivolts, 

Back to neurons and bone. 

And I think of our moments then, 
Never knowing your name— 
Nothing’s left in Pavlovia, 

But the maze, and the game, ... 


268 Gravity’s Rainsow 


They dance in flowing skeins. The rats and mice form 
circles, curl their tails in and out to make chrysanthemum 
and sunburst patterns, eventually all form into the shape 
of a single giant mouse, at whose eye Silvernail poses with 
a smile, arms up in a V, sustaining the last note of the 
song, along with the giant rodent-chorus and orchestra. 
One of PWD’s classic propaganda leaflets these days urges 
the Volksgrenadier: setzr V-2 Etn!, with a footnote, ex- 
plaining that “V-2” means to raise both arms in “honor- 
able surrender”—more gallows-humor—and telling how to 
say, phonetically, “ei ssérrender.” Is Webley’s V here for 
victory, or ssérrender? 

They have had their moment of freedom. Webley has 
only been a guest star. Now it’s back to the cages and the 
rationalized forms of death—death in the service of the 
one species cursed with the knowledge that it will die. ... 
“I would set you free, if I knew how. But it isn’t free out 
here. All the animals, the plants, the minerals, even other 
kinds of men, are being broken and reassembled every 
day, to preserve an elite few, who are the loudest to 
theorize on freedom, but the least free of all. I can’t even 
give you hope that it will be different someday—that 
They'll come out, and forget death, and lose Their tech- 
nology’s elaborate terror, and stop using every other form 
of life without mercy to keep what haunts men down to a 
tolerable level—and be like you instead, simply here, 
simply alive....” The guest star retires down the cor- 
ridors. 

Lights, all but a sprinkling, are out at “The White Visi- 
tation.” The sky tonight is deep blue, blue as a Navy great- 
coat, and the clouds in it are amazingly white. The wind 
is keen and cold. Old Brigadier Pudding, trembling, slips 
from his quarters down the back stairs, by a route only 
he knows, through the vacant orangery in the starlight, 
along a gallery hung to lace dandies, horses, ladies with - 
hard-boiled: eggs for eyes, out a small entresol (point of 
maximum danger...) and into a lumber-room, whose 
stacks of junk and random blacknesses, even this far from 
his childhood, are good for a chill, out again and down a 
set of metal steps, singing, he hopes quietly, for courage: 

Wash me in the water i 

That you wash your dirty dunnaye a 

And I shall be whiter than the whitewash on the Galle 3 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 269 


at last to D Wing, where the madmen of the ’g0s persist. 
The night attendant is asleep under the Daily Herald. He 
is a coarse-looking fellow, and has been reading the leader. 
K is an indication of things to come, next election? Oh, 
ear... 

But orders are to let the Brigadier pass. The old man 
tiptoes by, breathing fast. Mucus rattles back in his throat. 
He’s at the age where mucus is a daily companion, a cul- 
ture of mucus among the old, mucus in a thousand mani- 
festations, appearing in clots-by total surprise on a friend’s 
tablecloth, rimming his breath-passages at night in hard 
venturi, enough to darken the outlines of dreams and send 
him awake, pleading. . 

A voice from some cell too, distant for us to locate in- 
tones: “I am blessed Metatron.. I am keeper of the Secret. 
I am guardian of the Throne....” In here, the more dis- 
turbing Whig excesses have been Chiseled away or painted 
over. No point disturbing the inmates. All is neutral tones, 
soft draperies, Impressionist prints on the walls. Only the 
marble. floor has been left, and under the bulbs it gleams 
like water. Old Pudding must negotiate half a dozen offices 
or anterooms before reaching his destination. It hasn’t yet 
been a fortnight, but there is already something of ritual 
to this, of iteration. Each room will hold a single un- 
pleasantness for him: a test he must pass. He wonders if 
Pointsman hasn’t set these up too. Of course, of course he 
must ... how did the young bastard ever find out? Have I 
been talking in m’ sleep? Have they been slipping in at 

night with their truth serums to—and just at the clear 
emergence of the thought, here is his first test tonight. In 
the first room: a hypodermic outfit has been left lying on 
a table. Very clear and shining, with the rest of the room 
slightly out of focus. Yes mornings I felt terribly groggy, 
couldn’t wake, after dreaming—were they dreams? I was 
talking. ... But it’s all he remembers, talking while some- 
one else was there listening. ... He is shivering with fear, 
and his face is whiter than whitewash. 
_In the second antechamber is an empty red tin that held 
‘coffee. The brand name is Savarin. He understands that it 
_ means to say “Severin.” Oh, the filthy, the mocking scoun- 
‘drel.... But these are not malignant puns against an in- 
tended sufferer so much as a sympathetic magic, a repeti- 
_ tion high and low of some prevailing form (as, for instance, 
I 
Zat 
i 


270 Graviry’s RAInBow 


no sane demolition man at his evening dishwater will wash 
a spoon between two cups, or even between a glass and a 
plate, for fear of the Trembler it implies... because it’s a 
trembler-tongue he really holds, poised between its two 
fatal contacts, in fingers aching with having been so sud- 
denly reminded)... . In the third, a file drawer is left ajar, 
a stack of case histories partly visible, and an open copy of 
Krafft-Ebing. In the fourth, a human skull. His excitement 
grows. In the fifth, a Malacca cane. I’ve been in more wars 
for England than I can remember... haven't I paid 
enough? Risked it all for them, time after time.... Why 
must they torment an old man? In the sixth chamber, 
hanging from the overhead, is a tattered tommy up on 
White Sheet Ridge, field uniform burned in Maxim holes 
black-rimmed as the eyes of Cléo de Mérode, a own left 
eye shot away, the corpse beginning to stink . . no! 
an overcoat, someone’s old coat that’s all, mien on a a hook 
in the wall... but couldn’t he smell itP Now mustard 
gas comes washing in, into his brain with a fatal buzz 
as dreams will when we don’t want them, or when we 
are suffocating. A machine-gun on the German side 
sings dum diddy da da, an English weapon answers 
dum dum, and the night tightens coiling round his body, 
just before H-Hour. . 

At'the seventh cell, “his knuckles feeble against the dark 
oak, he knocks. The lock, remotely, electrically com- 
manded, slams open with an edge of echo trailing. He 
enters, and closes the door behind him. The cell is in semi- 
darkness, with only a scented candle burning back in a 
corner that seems miles away. She waits for him in a tall 
Adam chair, white body and black uniform-of- the-night. 
He drops to his knees. 

“Domina Nocturna... shining mother and last love. . 
your servant Ernest Pudding, reporting as ordered,” 

In these war years, the focus of a woman’s face is her 
mouth. Lipstick, among these tough and too often shallow 
girls, prevails like blood. Eyes have been left to weather 
and to tears: these days, with so much death hidden in the’ 
sky, out under the sea, among the blobs and smears of 
recco photographs, most women’s eyes are lonly functional. 
But Pudding comes out of a different time, and Pointsman 
has considered this detail too. The Brigadier’s lady has 


| 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 271 


spent an hour at her vanity mirror with mascara, liner, 
shadow, and pencil, lotions and rouges, brushes and tweez- 
ers, consulting from time to time a looseleaf album filled 
with photographs of the reigning beauties of thirty and 
forty years ago, so that her reign these nights may be 
authentic if not—it is for her state of mind as-well as his— 
legitimate. Her blonde hair is tucked and pinned beneath 
a thick wig. When she sits with her head down, forgetting 
the regal posture, the hair comes forward, over her shoul- 
ders, below her breasts. She is naked now, except for a long 
sable cape and black boots with court heels. Her only 
jewelry is a silver ring with an artificial ruby not cut to 
facets but still in the original boule, an arrogant gout of 
blood, extended now, waiting his kiss. 

His clipped mustache bristles, trembling, across her 
fingers. She has filed her nails to long points and polished 
them the same red as her ruby. Their ruby. In this light 
the nails are almost black. “That’s enough. Get ready.” 

She watches him undress, medals faintly jingling, starch 
shirt rattling. She wants a cigarette desperately, but her 
instructions are not to smoke. She tries to keep her hands 
still. “What are you thinking, Pudding?” 

“Of the night we first met.” The mud stank. The Archies 
were chugging in the darkness. His men, his poor sheep, 
had taken gas that morning. He was alone. Through the 
periscope, underneath a star shell that hung in the sky, he 
saw her... and though he was hidden, she saw Pudding. 
Her face was pale, she was dressed all in black, she stood 
in No-man’s Land, the machine guns raked their patterns 
all around her, but she needed no protection. “They knew 
you, Mistress. They were your own.” 

“And so were you.” 

“You called to me, you said, ‘I shall never leave you. 
You belong to me. We shall be together, again and again, 
though it may be years between. And you will always be 
at my service.’” ; 

He is on his knees again, bare as a baby. His old man’s 
flesh creeps coarse-grained in the light from the candle. 
Old scars and new welts group here and there over his 
skin. His penis stands at present arms. She smiles. At her 
‘command, he crawls forward to kiss her boots. He smells 
wax and leather, and can feel her toes flexing beneath his 


¥ 
iis 


Ss 


272 _ Gravity’s RaInsow - 


tongue, through the black skin. From the corner of his 
eye, on a little table, he can see the remains of her early 
evening meal, the edge of a plate, the tops of two bottles, 
mineral water, French wine.... 

“Time for pain now, Brigadier. You shall have twelve of 
the best, if your offering tonight pleases me.” 

Here is his worst moment. She has refused him before. 
His memories of the Salient do not interest her, She doesn’t 
seem to care for mass slaughter as much as for myth, and 
personal terror... but please... please let her accept.... 

“At Badajoz,” whispering humbly, “during the war in 
Spain ...a bandera of Franco’s Legion advanced on the 
city, singing their regimental hymn. They sang of the bride 
they had taken. It was you, Mistress: they-they were pro- 
claiming you as their bride. ...” 

She’s silent for a bit, making him wait. At last, eyes 
holding his, she smiles, the component of evil in it she has 
found he needs taking care of itself as usual: “Yes.... 
Many of them did become my bridegrooms that day,” she 
whispers, flexing the bright cane. There seems to be a 
winter wind in the room. Her image threatens to shake 
apart into separate flakes of snow. He loves to listen to her 
speak, hers is the voice that found him from the broken 
rooms of the Flemish villages, he knows, he can tell from 
the accent, the girls who grew old in the Low Countries, 
whose voices went corrupted from young to old, gay to 
indifferent, as that war drew out, season into ever more 
bitter season.... “I took their brown Spanish bodies to 
mine. They were the color of the dust, and the twilight, 
and of meats roasted to a perfect. texture... most of them 
were so very young. A summer day, a day of love: one of 
the most poignant I ever knew. Thank you. You shall have 
your pain tonight.” F 

It’s a part of her routine she can enjoy, at least. Though 
she has never read any classic British pornography, she 
does feel herself, sure as a fish, well in the local main- 
stream. Six on the buttocks, six more across the nipples. 
Whack where’s that Gourd Surprise now? Eh? She likes 
the way the blood leaps to cross last night’s welts. Often 
it’s all she can do to keep from moaning herself at each of 
his grunts of pain, two voices in a disson which would 
be much less accidental than it sounded.... Some nights 


: 
_— 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 273- 


she’s gagged him with a ceremonial sash, bound him with 
a gold-tasseled fourragére or his own Sam Browne. But 
tonight he lies humped im the floor at her feet, his withered 
ass elevated for the cane, bound by nothing but his need 
for pain, for something real, something pure. They have 
taken him so far from his simple nerves. They have stuffed 
paper illusions and military euphemisms between him and 
this truth, this rare decency, this moment at her scrupulous 
feet . . . no it’s not guilt here, not so much as amazement— 
that he could have listened to so many years of ministers, 
scientists, doctors each with his specialized lies to tell, 
when she was here all the time, sure in her ownership of 
his failing body,-his true body: undisguised by uniform, un- 
cluttered by drugs to keep from him her communiqués of 
vertigo, nausea and pain. ... Above all, pain. The clearest 

poetry, the endearment oe greatest worth. . 

Pidustruieiete lathes oienees to. kiss..the instrument. She 
stands over him-now, legs astride, pelvis cocked forward, 
fur cape held apart on her hips. He dares to gaze up at her 
cunt, that fearful vortex. Her pubic hair has been dyed 
black for the occasion. He sighs, and lets escape a small 
shameful groan. ; 

“Ah . . . yes, know.” She laughs. “Poor mortal Brigadier, 
I know. It is my last mystery,” stroking with fingemails her 
labia, “you cannot ask a woman to reveal her last mystery, 
now, can your” 

“Please . 

“No. Not tonight. Kneel here and take what I give you.” 

_ Despite himself—already a reflex—he glances quickly 
over at the bottles on the table, the plates, soiled with 
juices of meat, Hollandaise, bits of gristle and: bone. . 
Her shadow covers his face and upper torso, her-leather 


274 Graviry’s RaInsow 


Don’t touch my skin.” Earlier in this game she was ner- 
vous, constipated, wondering if this was anything like 
male impotence. But thoughtful Pointsman, anticipating 
_ this, has been sending laxative pills with her meals. Now 

her intestines whine softly, and she feels shit begin to 
slide down and out. He kneels with his arms up holding 
the rich cape. A dark turd appears out the crevice, out of 
the absolute darkness between her white buttocks. He 
spreads his knees, awkwardly, until he can feel the leather 
of her boots. He Jeans forward to surround the hot turd 
with his lips, sucking on it tenderly, licking along its lower 
side... he is thinking, he’s sorry, he can’t help it, thinking 
of a Negro’s penis, yes he knows it abrogates part of the 
conditions set, but it will not be denied, the image of a 
brute African who will make him behave. ... The stink of 
shit floods his nose, gathering him, surrounding. It is the 
smell of Passchendaele, of the Salient. Mixed with the 
mud, and the putrefaction of corpses, it was the sovereign 
smell of their first meeting, and her emblem. The turd 
slides into his mouth, down to his gullet. He gags, but 
bravely clamps his teeth shut. Bread that would only have 
floated in porcelain waters somewhere, unseen, untasted— 
risen now and baked in the bitter intestinal Oven to bread 
we know, bread that’s light as domestic comfort, secret as 
death in bed... Spasms in his throat continue. The pain 
is terrible. With his tongue he mashes shit against the roof 
of his mouth and ni gon to chew, thickly now, the only 
sound in the room. 

. There are two more turds, smaller ones, and when he 
has eaten these, residual shit to lick out of her anus. He 
prays that she'll let him drop the cape over himself, to be 
allowed, in the silk-lined darkness, to stay a while longer 
with his submissive tongue straining upward into her ass- 
hole. But she moves away. The fur evaporates from his 
hands. She orders him to masturbate for her. She has 
watched Captain Blicero with Gottfried, and has learned 
the proper style. ~ 

The Brigadier comes quickly. The rich’ Goer of semen 
fills the room like smoke. 

“Now go.” He wants to cry. But he has leaded before, 
offered her—absurdly—his life. Tears well and slide from 
his eyes. He can’t look into hers. “You have shit all over 


é Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 275 
your mouth now. Perhaps I'll take a photograph of you like 
that. In case you ever get tired of me.” 

“No. No, I’m only tired of that,” jerking his head back 
out of D Wing to encompass the rest of “The White 

_ Visitation.” “So bloody tired. . 

“Get dressed, Remember to wipe your mouth off. Ill 
send for you when I want you again.” 

Dismissed. Back in uniform, he closes the cell door and 
retraces his way in. The night attendant is still asleep. 
Cold air hits Pudding like a blow. He sobs, bent, alone, 
cheek resting a moment against the rough stone walls of 
the Palladian house. His regular quarters have become a 
place of exile, and his real home is with the Mistress of 
the Night, with her soft boots and hard foreign voice. He 

_ has nothing to look forward to but a late-night cup of 

broth, routine :papers to sign, a dose of penicillin that 
Pointsman has ordered him to take, to combat the effects 
of E. coli. Perhaps, though, tomorrow night ... perhaps 
then. He can’t see how he can hold out much longer. But 
perhaps, in the hours just before dawn... 


O 


The great cusp—green equinox and turning, dreaming 
fishes to young ram, watersleep to firewaking, bears down 
on us. Across the Western Front, up in the Harz in Blei- 
cheréde, Wernher van Braun, lately wrecked arm in a 
plaster cast, prepares to celebrate his 33rd birthday. 
Artillery thunders through the afternoon. Russian tanks 
‘aise dust phantoms far away over the German leas. The 
stroks are home, and the first violets have appeared. 
At “The White Visitation,” days along the chalk piece 
of seacoast now are fine and clear. The office girls are 
bundling into fewer sweaters, and breasts peaking 
_ through into visibility again. March has come in like a 
lamb. Lloyd George is dying. Stray visitors are observed 
- now along the still-forbidden beach, sitting among obso- 
_ lescent networks of steel rod and cable, trousers rolled to 
‘the knee or hair unsnooded, chilly gray toes stirring the 
‘shingle. Just offshore, underwater, run miles of secret 
iping, oil ready at a valve-twist to be released and roast 


276 Gravity's Rainsow 


German invaders who belong back in dreams already 
old... fuel waiting hypergolic ignition that will not come 
unless now as some junior-bureaucratic rag or May up- 
rising of the spirit, to Bavarian tunesmith Carl Orff’s lively 


O, O, O, 
To-tus flore-ol 
Iam amore virginali 
Totus ardeo... 


all this fortress coast alight, Portsmouth to Dungeness, 
blazing for the love of spring. Plots to this effect hatch 
daily among the livelier heads at “The White Visitation” — 
the winter of dogs, of black snowfalls of issueless words, is 
ending. Soon it will be behind us. But once there, behind 
us—will it still go on emanating its hooded cold, however 
the fires burn at sea? 

At the Casino Hermann Goering, a new regime has been 
taking over. General Wivern’s is now the only familiar 
face, though he seems to’ve been downgraded. Slothrop’s 
own image of the plot against him has grown. Earlier the 
conspiracy was monolithic, all-potent, nothing he could 
ever touch. Until that drinking game, and that scene with 
that Katje, and both the sudden good-bys. But now— 

Proverbs for Paranoids, 1: You may never get to touch 
the Master, but you can tickle his creatures. 

And then, well, he is lately beginning to find his way 
into one particular state of consciousness, not a dream cer- 
tainly, perhaps what used to be called a “reverie,” though 
one where the colors are more primaries than pastels... 
and at such times it seems he has touched, and stayed 
touching, for a while, a soul we know, a voice that has 
more than once spoken through research-facility medium 
Carroll Eventyr: the late Roland Feldspath again, long— 
co-opted expert on control systems, guidance equations, 
feedback situations for this Aeronautical Establishment 
and that. Seems that, for personal reasons, Roland has re- 
mained hovering over this Slothropian space, through sun- 
light whose energy he barely feels and) through storms 
that tickled his back with static electricity has Roland been 
whispering from eight kilometers, the savage height, sta- 
tioned as he has been along one of the Last Parabolas— 


oa 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering av 


flight paths that must never be taken—working as one of 


the invisible Interdictors of the stratosphere now, bureauc- 
ratized hopelessly on that side as ever on this, he keeps 
his astral meathooks in as well as can be expected, curled 
in the “sky” so tense with all the frustrations of trying to 


. reach across, with the impotence of certain dreamers who 


try to wake or talk and cannot, who struggle against 
weights and probes of cranial pain that it seems could 
not be borne waking; he waits, not necessarily for the aim- 
less entrances of boobs like Slothrop here— 

Roland shivers. Is this the one? This? to be figurehead 
for the latest passage? Oh, dear. God have mercy: what 
storms, what monsters of the Aether could this Slothrop 


ever charm away for anyone? 


Well, Roland must make the best of it, that’s all. If they 
get this far, he has to show them what he knows about 
Control. That’s one of his death’s secret missions. His 
cryptic utterances that night at Snoxall’s about economic 


- systems are merely the folksy everyday background chatter 


over here, a given condition of being. Ask the Germans 
especially. Oh, it is a real sad story, how shoddily their 
Schwarmerei for Control was used by the folks in power. 
Paranoid Systems of History (PSH), a short-lived periodi- 


- cal of the 1920s whose plates have all mysteriously van- 


ished, natch, has even suggested, in more than one edi- 
torial, that the whole German Inflation was created de- 
liberately, simply to drive young enthusiasts of the Cy- 
bernetic Tradition into Control work: after all, an economy 
inflating, upward bound as a balloon, its own definition of 
Earth’s surface drifting upward in value, uncontrolled, 
drifting with the days, the feedback system expected to 
maintain the value of the mark constant having, humiliat- 


ingly, failed.... Unity gain around the loop, unity gain, 


r 


zero change, and hush, that way, forever, these were the 


secret rhymes of the childhood of the Discipline of Con- 


trol—secret and terrible, as the scarlet histories say. Di- 


verging oscillations of any kind were nearly the Worst 


Threat. You could not pump the swings of these play- 


grounds higher than a certain angle from the vertical. 


_ Fights broke up quickly, with a smoothness that had not 
- been long in coming. Rainy days never had much lightning 


s thunder to them, only a haughty glass grayness collect- 


278 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


ing in the lower parts, a monochrome overlook of valleys 
crammed with mossy deadfalls jabbing roots at heaven 
not entirely in malign playfulness (as some white surprise 
for the elitists up there paying no mind, no...), valleys 
thick with autumn, and in the rain a withering, spinsterish 
brown behind the gold of it... very selectively blighted 
rainfall teasing you across the lots and into the back 
streets, which grow ever more mysterious and badly paved 
and more deeply platted, lot giving way to crooked lot 
seven times and often more, around angles of hedge, across 
freaks of the optical daytime until we have passed, fevered, 
silent, out of the region of streets itself and into the 
countryside, into the quilted dark fields and the wood, the 
beginning of the true forest, where a bit of the ordeal 
ahead starts to show, and our hearts to feel afraid... but 
just as no swing could ever be thrust above a certain 
height, so, beyond a certain radius, the forest could be 
penetrated no further. A limit was always there to be 
brought to. It was so easy to grow up under that dis- 
pensation. All was just as wholesome as could be, Edges 
were hardly ever glimpsed, much less flirted at or with. 
Destruction, oh, and demons—yes, including Maxwell’s— 
were there, deep in the woods, with other beasts vaulting 
among the earthworks of your safety. . 

So was the Rocket’s terrible pases aataded, literally, 
to bourgeois terms, terms of an equation such as that ele- 
gant blend of philosophy and hardware, abstract change 
and hinged pivots of real metals which describes motion 
under the aspect of yaw control: 


wf , 
o<t + 8* oy Pe S)a = — 


F 5 es 


preserving, possessing, steering between Scylla and Cha- 
rybdis the whole way to Brennschluss. If any of the young 
engineers saw correspondence between the deep conserva- 
tism of Feedback and the kinds of lives they were coming 
to lead in the very process of embracing! it, it got lost, or 
disguised—none of them made the connection, at least not 
while alive: it took death to show it to hagee Feldspath, 
death with its very good chances for being Too Late, and 
a host of other souls feeling themselves, even now, Rocket- 


: Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 279 


: like, driving out toward the stone-blue lights of the 
Vacuum under a Control they cannot quite name... the 
illumination out here is surprisingly mild, mild as heavenly 
robes, a feeling” of population and invisible force, si 
ments of “voices,” glimpses into another order of being. . 

\ Afterward, Slothrop would be left not so much with any 
clear symbol or scheme to it as with some alkaline after- 
taste of lament, an irreducible strangeness, a self-sufficiency 
nothing could get inside. ... 

Yes, sort of German, these episodes here. Well, these 
days Slothrop is even dreaming in the language. Folks 
have been teaching him dialects, Plattdeutsch for the zone 
the British plan to occupy, Thuringian if the Russians hap- 
pen not to drive as far as Nordhausen, where the central 
rocket works is located. Along with the language teachers 
come experts-in ordnance, electronics, and aerodynamics, 
and a fellow from Shell International Petroleum named 
Hilary Bounce, who is going to teach him about propul- 
sion. 

It seems that early in 1941, the British Ministry of 
Supply let a £10,000 research contract to Shell—wanted 
Shell to develop a rocket engine that would run on some- 
‘thing besides cordite, which was being used in those days 
to blow up various sorts of people at the rate of oodles ’n’ 
oodles of tons an hour, and couldn’t be spared for rockets. 
A team ramrodded by one Isaac Lubbock set up a static- 
test facility at Langhurst near Horsham, and began to 
experiment with liquid oxygen and aviation fuel, running 
their first successful test in August of ’42. Engineer Lub- 
bock was a double first at Cambridge and the Father of 
British Liquid Oxygen Research, and what he didn’t know 
about the sour stuff wasn’t worth knowing. His chief 
assistant these days is Mr. Geoffrey Gollin, and it is to 
Gollin that Hilary Bounce reports. 

“Well, I'm an Esso man myself,” Slothrop thinks he 
ought to mention. “My old short was a gasgobbler all 
right, but a gourmet, Any time it used that Shell I had to 
drop a whole bottle of that Bromo in the tank just to 
settle that poor fucking Terraplane’s plumbing down.” 

“Actually,” the eyebrows of Captain Bounce, a 110% 
company man, going up and down earnestly to help him 

out, “we handled only the transport and storage end of 


Yam ,. 


al 


280 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


things then. In those days, before the Japs and the Nazis 
you know, production and refining were up to the Dutch 
office, at The Hague.” 

Slothrop, poor sap, is remembering Katje, lost Katje, 
saying the name of her city, whispering Dutch love-words 
as they moved down seamornings now another age, another 
dispensation. ... Wait a minute, “That’s Bataafsche Petro- 
leum Maatschappij, N.V.?” 

“Right.” 

It’s also the negative of a recco photograph of the city, 
darkbrown, festooned with water-spots, never.enough time 
to let these dry out completely— 

“Are you blokes aware,” they're trying to teach him 
English English too, heaven knows why, and it keeps 
coming out like Cary Grant, “that Jerry—old Jerry, you 
know—has been in that The Hague there, shooting his 
bloody rockets at that London, a-and using, the... Royal 
Dutch Shell headquarters building, at the Josef Israelplein 
if I remember correctly, for a radio guidance transmitter? 
What bizarre shit is that, old man?” . 

Bounce stares at him, jingling his gastric jewelry, not 
knowing what to make of Slothrop, exactly. 

“I mean,” Slothrop now working himself into a fuss 
over something that only disturbs him, dimly, nothing to 
kick up a row over, is it? “doesn’t it. strike you as just a 
bit odd, you Shell chaps working on your liquid engine 
your side of the Channel you know, and their chaps firing 
their bloody things at you with your own... blasted... 
Shell transmitter tower, you see.” 

“No, I can’t see that it makes—what are you getting at? 
Surely they’d simply have picked the tallest building they 
could find that’s in a direct line from their firing sites to 
London.” 

“Yes, and at the right distance too, don’t forget that— 
exactly twelve kilometers from the firing site. Hey? That’s 
exactly what I mean.” Wait, oh wait. Is that what he 
means? ' | 

“Well, I’d never thought of it that way.” 

Neither have I, Jackson. Oh, me neither folks... ..' 

Hilary Bounce and his Puzzled Smile. Ahother innocent, 
a low-key enthusiast like Sir Stephen Dodson-Truck. But: 

Proverbs for Paranoids, 2: The innocence of the crea-~ 


ae, Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 281 


_ tures is in inverse proportion to the immortality of the 
Master. 

“T hope I haven’t said anything wrong.” 

“Whyzat?” 

“You look—” Bounce aspirating what he means to be a 

\ warm little laugh, “worried.” 

Worried, all right. By the jaws and teeth of some Crea- 
ture, some Presence so large that nobody else can see it— 
there! that’s that monster I was telling you about. —That’s 
no monster, stupid, that’s clouds! —No, can’t you see? It’s 

-his feet— Well, Slothrop can feel this beast in the sky: its 
visible claws and scales are being mistaken for clouds and 
other plausibilities . . . or else everyone has agreed to call 
them other names when Slothrop is listening. ... 

“It’s only a ‘wild ‘coincidence, Slothrop.” 

He will learn to hear quote marks in the speech of 
others. It is a bookish kind of reflex, maybe he’s genetically 
predisposed—all ‘those earlier Slothrops packing Bibles 
around the blue hilltops as part of their gear, memorizing 
chapter and verse the structures of Arks, Temples, Vision- 
ary Thrones—all the materials and dimensions. Data be- 
hind which always, nearer or farther, was the numinous 
certainty of God. 

Well, what more appropriate way for Tyrone to Get It 
one cold morning than this: 

It’s a blueprint of a German parts list, reproduced so 
crummy he can hardly read the words—“Vorrichtung fiir 
die Isolierung, 0011-5565/43,” now what's thisP He knows 
the number by heart, it’s the original contract number for 
the A4 rocket as a whole. What’s an “insulation device” 
doing with the Aggregat’s contract number? And a DE 
rating too, the highest Nazi priority there isP Not good. 
Either a clerk at OKW fucked up, which is not unheard-of, 
or else he just didn’t know the number, and put the 
rocket’s in as the next best thing. Claim, part and work 

- numbers all have the same flagnote, which directs Slothrop 
to a Document SG-1. Flagnote on the flagnote sez “Ge- 
“heime Kommandosache! This is a state secret, in the mean- 
ing of § 35 R5138.” 
“Say,” he greets General Wivern nipping in through the 
_ door, “like to get ahold of a copy of that Document SG-1.” 
. oad “Haw, haw,” replies the General. “So would our cchaEs, 
: S| Mpagine,” 


282 Gravity’s Rainsow 


“Quit fooling.” Every piece of Allied intelligence on the 
A4, however classified, gets stuffed into a secret funnel 
back in London and all comes out in Slothrop’s fancy cell 
at the Casino. So far they've held back nothing. 

“Slothrop, there are no ‘SG’ documents.” 

First impulse is to rattle the parts list in the man’s face, 
but today he is the shrewd Yankee foxing the redcoats. 
“Oh. Well, maybe I read it wrong,” making believe look 
around the paper-littered room, “maybe it was a ‘56’ or 
something, jeepers it was just here... .” 

The General goes away again, Leaving Slothrop with a 
ers kind of a, well not an obsession really... not yet 

. Opposite the parts listing, over in the Materials column 
now, here’s “Imipolex G.” Oh really. Insulation device 
made of Imipolex G eh? He kicks around the room looking 
for his handbook of German trade names. Nothing even 
close to it there... he locates next a master materials list 
for the A4 and all its support equipment, and there’s sure 
no Imipolex G in that either. Scales and claws, and foot- 
falls no oné else seems to hear. . 

“Something wrong?” Hilary Bounce again, with his nose 
in the doorway. 

“It’s about this liquid oxygen, need some more of that 
specific impulse data, there.” 

“Specific ...do you mean specific thrust?” 

“Oops, thrust, thrust,” English English to the rescue, 
Bounce diverted: 

“For LOX and alcohol it’s about 200. What more do you 
need to know?” 

“But didn’t you chaps use - petrol at Langhurst?” 

“Among other things, yes.” 

“Well it’s about those other things. Don’t you know 
there’s a war on? You can’t be proprietary about stuff like 
that.” 

“But all our company reports are back in London. Per- 
haps my next time out—” 

“Shit, this red tape. I need it now, Cap’n!” He goes 
around assuming they’ve assigned him a limitless Need To 
Know, and Bounce confirms it: 

“I could send back by teletype, I suppoie 

“Now yer talkin’!” Teletype? Yes, Hilary Bonine has his 
own, private, Shell International N etwork Teletype tee: hes 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 283 


Terminal, just what Slothrop was hoping for, right in his 
hotel room, back in the closet behind a rack of Alkit uni- 
forms and stiff shirts. Slothrop finesses his way in with the 
help of his friend Michele, whom he’s noticed Bounce has 
an eye on. “Howdy babe,” up in a brown stocking-hung 
garret where the dancing girls sleep, “how'd you like to 
get fixed up with a big oilman tonight?” Some language 
problem here, she’s thinking of getting connected through 
metal fittings to a gross man dripping somehow with 
crude oil, a sex angle she’s not sure she’d enjoy, but they 
get that one straightened out, and presently Michele is 
raring to go sweet-talk the man away from his teletype 
long enough for Slothrop to get on to London and ask 
about Imipolex G. Indeed, she has noted Captain Bounce 
now and then among her nightly admirers, noted in par- 
ticular an item of belly-brass that Slothrop’s seen too: a 
gold benzene ring with a formée cross in the center—the 
IG Farben Award for Meritorious Contributions to Syn- 
thetics Research. Bounce got that one back in ’32. The in- 
dustrial liaison it suggests was indeed dozing at the bottom 
of Slothrop’s mind when the Rocket Guidance Transmitter 
Question arose. It has even, in a way, inspired the present 
teletype plot. Who'd know better than an outfit like Shell, 
with no real country, no side in any war, no specific face 
or heritage: tapping instead out of that global stratum, 
most deeply laid, from which all the appearances of cor- 
porate ownership really spring? 

Okay. Now there is a party tonight over on the Cap, 
chez Raoul de la Perlimpinpin, young madcap heir of the 
Limoges fireworks magnate Georges (“Poudre”) de la 
Perlimpinpin—if “party” is the word for something that’s 
been going on nonstop ever since this piece of France was 
liberated. Slothrop is allowed—under the usual surveil- 
lance—to drop in to Raoul’s whenever the mood strikes 
him. It’s a giddy, shiftless crowd out there—they drift in 
from all comers of Allied Europe, linked by some network 
of family, venery and a history of other such parties whose 
complexity his head’s never quite been able to fit around. 


-Here and there faces will go by, old American faces from 


Harvard or from SHAEF, names he’s lost—they are 
revenants, maybe accidental, maybe...~ 
It is to this party that Michele has seduced Hilary 


284 Gravity's Rainsow 


Bounce, and for which Slothrop, soon as his reply from 
London has come nattering through, in clear, on Bounce’s 
machine, now proceeds to dude himself up for. He'll read 
, the information through later. Singing, 


With my face shined up-like a microphone 
And uh Sta-Comb on my hair, 

I'm just as suave-as, an ice-cream cone, say, 
I’m Mis-ter Debo-nair. ... 


and turned out in a green French suit of wicked cut with 
a subtle purple check in it, broad flowered tie won at the 
trente-et-quarante table, brown and white wingtip shoes 
-with golf. cleats, and white socks, Slothrop tops off now 
with a midnight-blue snap-brim fedora and is away, click- 
ety clack out the foyer of the Casino Hermann Goering, 
looking sharp. As he exits, a wiry civilian, disguised as the 
Secret Service’s notion of an Apache, eases away from a 
niche in the porte-cochere, and follows Slothrop’s cab out 
"the winding dark road to Raoul’s party. 


oO 


Turns out that some merrymaker has earlier put a hun- 
dred grams of hashish in the Hallandaise, Word of this has 
got around. There has been a big run on broccoli. Roasts 
lie growing cold on the room-long buffet tables, A third of 
the company are already asleep, mostly on the floor. It is 
necessary to thread one’s way among bodies to get to 
where anything’s happening. 

What's happening is not clear. There are the usual tight 
ittle groups out in the gardens, dealing. Not much spec- 
tacle tonight. A homosexual triangle has fizzed over into 


pinches and recriminations, so as to block the door to the. 


bathroom. Young officers are outside vomiting among the 
zinnias. Couples are wandering. Girls abound, velvet- 
bowed, voile-sleeved, underfed, broad-shouldered and 
permed, talking in half a dozen languages, sometimes 
brown from the sun here, others pale as Death’s Vicar 
from more eastern parts of the War. Eager) young chaps 
with patent-leather hair rush about trying to vamp the 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 285 


ladies, while older heads with no hair at all prefer to wait, 
putting out only minimal effort, eyes and mouths across 
the rooms, talking business in the meantime. One end of 
the salon is occupied by a dance band and an emaciated 
crooner with wavy hair and very red eyes, who is singing: 


_ Jursa (Fox-tTror) 


Ju-lia, 

Would you think me pe-cul-iar, 
If I should fool ya, 

In-to givin’ me—just-a-little-kiss? 


Jool-yaaahh, 

No one else could love you tru-lier, 
How Id worship and bejewel ya, 

If you'd on-ly give-me just-a-litile-kiss! 


Ahh Jool-yaaahhhh— 

My poor heart grows un-ru-lier, 
No one oolier or droolier, - 
Could I be longing for— 
What’s more— 


Ju-lia, 

I would shout hallelujah, 
To have my Jool-yaaahh, 
In-my-arms forevermore. 


Saxophony and Park Lane kind of tune, perfect for cer- 
tain states of mind. Slothrop sees Hilary Bounce, clearly a 
victim of the hallucinogenic Hollandaise, nodded out on a 
great pouf with Michele, who’s been fondling his IG 
Farben trinket for the past two or three hours. Slothrop 
waves, but neither one notices him. 

Dopers and drinkers struggle together without shame at 
the buffet and in the kitchens, ransacking the closets, lick- 
ing out the bottoms of casseroles. A nude bathing party 
passes through on the way down the sea-steps to the beach. 


_ Our host, that Raoul, is roaming around in a ten-gallon 


hat. Tom Mix shirt and brace of sixguns with a Percheron 
horse by the bridle. The horse is leaving turds on the 
Bokhara rug, also on the odd supine guest. It is all out of 


_ shape, no focus to it until a sarcastic flourish from the 


286 Gravitry’s RAINBOW 


band, and here comes the meanest customer Slothrop has 
seen outside of a Frankenstein movie—wearing a white 
zoot suit with reet pleats and a long gold keychain that 
swings in flashing loops as he crosses the room with a 
scowl for everybody, in something of a hurry but taking 
the time to scan faces and bodies, head going side to side, 
methodical, a little ominous. He stops at last in front of 
Slothrop, who’s putting together a Shirley Temple for 
himself, 

“You.” A finger the size of a corncob, an inch from 
Slothrop’s nose. 

“You bet,” Slothrop dropping a maraschino cherry on 
the rug then squashing it as he takes a step backward, 
“Tm the man all right. Sure. What is it? Anything.” 

“Come on.” They proceed outside to a eucalyptus grove, 
where Jean-Claude Gongue, notorious white slaver of 
Marsf¢illes, is busy white-slaving. “Hey you,” hollering into 
the iy “you wanna be a white slave, huh?” “Shit no,” 

rs some invisible girl, “I wanna be a green slavel” 
“Magenta!” yells somebody from up in an olive tree, “Ver- 
milion!” “Think I'll take up dealing dope,” sez Jean-Claude. 

“Look,” Slothrop’s friend producing a kraft-paper en- 
_velope that even in the gloom Slothrop can tell is fat with 
American Army yellow-seal scrip, “I want. you to hold 
this for me, till I ask for it back. It looks like Italo is going 
to get here before Tamara, and I’m not sure which one—” 

“At this rate, Tamara’s gonna get here before tonight,” 
Slothrop interjects in a Groucho Marx voice. ~ 

“Don’t try to undermine my confidence i in you,” advises 
the Large One. “You're the man.” 

“Right,” Slothrop tucking envelope inside pocket. “Say, 
where'd you get that zoot you're vee thereP” 

“What’s your size?” 

“42, medium.” 
Sg shall have one,” and so saying he rumbles off back - 
inside. 

“A-and a sharp keychain!” Slothrop calls after. What 
th’ heck’s going onP He wanders around asking a question 
or two. The fella turns out to be Blodgett Waxwing, well- 
known escapee from the Caserne at Paris, the 
worst stockade in the ETO. Waxwing’s specialty is phony- 
ing documents of various sorts—PX ration cards, passports, 


Ny 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 287 


Soldbiicher—whilst dealing in Army hardware also as a 
sideline. He has been AWOL off and on since the Battle of 
the Bulge, and with a death rap for that over his head he 
still goes into U.S. Army bases at night to the canteens to 
watch the movies—provided they’re westerns, he loves 
those shit-kickers, the sound of hoofbeats through a metal 
speaker across a hundred yards of oildrums and deuce ’n’ 
a half ruts in the foreign earth makes his heart stir as if a 
breeze blew there, he’s got some of his many contacts to 
run him off a master schedule of every movie playing in 
every occupation town in the Theatre, and he’s been 
known to hot-wire a general’s jeep just to travel up to that 
Poitiers for the evening to see a good old Bob Steele or 
Johnny Mack Brown. His picture may hang prominently in 
all the guardrooms and be engraved in thousands of snow- 
drops’ brains, but he has seen The Return of Jack Slade 
twenty-seven times, 

. The story here tonight is a typical WW II romantic in- 


_ trigue, just another evening at Raoul’s place, involving a 
future opium shipment’s being used by Tamara as security 


against a loan from Italo, who in turn owes Waxwing for a 
Sherman tank his friend Theophile i is trying to smuggle into 
Palestine but must raise a few thousand pounds for pur- 
poses of bribing across the border, and so has put the tank 
up as collateral to borrow from Tamara, who is using part 
of her loan from Italo to pay him. But meantime the 
opium deal doesn’t look like it’s going to come through, 
because the middleman hasn’t been heard from in several 
weeks, along with the money Tamara fronted him, which 
she got from Raoul de la Perlimpinpin through Waxwing, 
who is now being pressured by Raoul for the money be- 
cause Italo, deciding the tank belongs to Tamara now, 
showed up last night and took it away to an Undisclosed 
Location as payment on his loan, thus causing Raoul to 
panic. Something like that. 

Slothrop’s tail is being made indecent propositions by 
two of the homosexuals who’ve been fighting in the bath- 
room, Bounce and Michele are nowhere in sight, and 
neither’s that Waxwing. Raoul is talking earnestly to his 


_ horse. Slothrop is just settling down next to a girl in a 


prewar Worth frock and with a face like Tenniel’s Alice, 


' same forehead, nose, hair, when from outside comes this 


288 Gravity’s Rainsow 


most godawful clanking, snlifting crunching of wood, girls 
come running terrified out of the eucalyptus trees and into 
the house and right behind them what comes crashing 
now into the pallid lights of the garden but—why the 
Sherman Tank itself! headlights burning like the eyes of 
King Kong, treads spewing grass and pieces of flagstone as 
it manoeuvres around and comes to a halt. Its 75 mm can- 
non swivels until it’s pointing through the French windows 
right down into the room. “Antoine!” a young lady focus- 
ing in on the gigantic muzzle, “for heaven’s sake, not 
now....” A hatch flies open and Tamara——Slothrop 
guesses: wasn’t Italo supposed to have the tankP—uh— 
emerges shrieking to denounce Raoul, Waxwing, Italo, 
Theophile, and the middleman on the opium deal. “But 
now,” she screams, “I have you all! One coup de foudrel” 
The hatch drops—oh, Jesus—there’s the sound of a 3-inch 
shell being loaded into its breech. Girls start to scream 
and make for the exits. Dopers are looking around, blink- 
ing, smiling, saying yes in a number of ways. Raoul tries 
to mount his horse and make his escape, but misses the 
saddle and slides all the way over, falling into a tub 
of black-market Jell-o, raspberry flavor, with whipped 
cream on top. “Aw, no...” Slothrop having about de- 
cided to make a flanking run for the tank when 
YYYBLAAANNNGGG! the cannon lets loose an enormous 
roar, flame shooting three feet into the room, shock wave 
driving eardrums in to middle of brain, blowing everybody 
against the far walls. 

A drape has caught fire. Slothrop, tripping over party- 
goers, can’t hear anything, knows his head hurts, keeps 
running through the smoke at the tank—leaps on, goes to 
undog the hatch and is nearly knocked off by Tamara 
popping up to holler at everybody again. After a struggle 
which shouldn’t be without its erotic moments, for Tamara 
is a swell enough looking twist with some fine moves, 
Slothrop manages to get her in a come-along and drag her 
down off of the tank. But loud noise and all, look—he 
doesn’t seem to have an erection, Hmm, This is a datum 
London never got, because nobody was Poe 

Tums out the projectile, a dud, has only torn holes in 
several walls, and demolished a large allegorical painting 
of Virtue and Vice in an unnatural act. Virtue had one of 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 289 


_ those dim faraway smiles. Vice was scratching his shaggy 


head, a little bewildered. The burning drape’s been put 
out with champagne. Raoul is in tears, thankful for his 
life, wringing Slothrop’s hands and kissing his cheeks, 
leaving trails of Jell-o wherever he touches. Tamar is 


\ escorted away by Raoul’s bodyguards. Slothrop has just 


disengaged himself and is wiping the Jell-o off of his suit 
when there is a heavy touch on his shoulder. 

“You were right. You are the man.” 

“That’s nothing.” Errol Flynn frisks his mustache. “I 
oe a dame from an octopus not so long ago, how about 

atP” 

“With one difference,” sez Blodgett Waxwing. “This 
really happened tonight. But that octopus didn’t.” 

“How do you know?” — 

“I know a lot. Not everything, but a few things you 
don’t. Listen Slothrop—you'll be needing a friend, and 
sooner than you think. Don’t come here to the villa—it 
may be too hot by then—but if you can make it as far as 
Nice—” he hands over a business card, embossed with a 


chess knight and an address on Rue Rossini. “I'll take the 


envelope back. Here’s your suit. Thanks, brother.” He’s 
gone. His talent is just to fade when he wants to. The 
zoot suit is in a box tied with a purple ribbon. Keychain’s 
there too. They both belonged to a kid who used to live 
in East Los Angeles, named Ricky Gutiérrez. During the 
Zoot Suit Riots in 1943, young Gutiérrez was set upon by 
a carload of Anglo vigilantes from Whittier, beaten up 
while the L.A. police watched and called out advice, then 
arrested for disturbing the peace. The judge was allowing 
zoot-suiters to choose between jail and the Army. 
Gutiérrez joined up, was wounded on Saipan, de- 
veloped gangrene, had to have his arm amputated, 
is home now, married to a girl who works in the 
kitchen at a taco place in San Gabriel, can’t find any 
work himself, drinks a lot during the day.... But his 
old zoot, and those of thousands of others busted that 
summer, hanging empty on the backs of all the Mexican 
L.A. doors, got bought up and have found their way over 


here, into the market, no harm tuming a little profit, is 


$ 
Qe 
My 


there, they’d only have hung there in the fat smoke and 
the baby smell, in the rooms with shades pulled down 


290 Gravity’s Rainsow 


against the white sun beating, day after day, on the dried 
palm trees and muddy culverts, inside these fly-ridden and 
empty rooms.... 


O 


Imipolex G has proved to be nothing more—or less—sin- 
ister than a new plastic, an aromatic heterocyclic polymer, 
developed in 1939, years before its time, by one L. Jamf 
for IG Farben. It is stable at high temperatures, like up to 
go00°C., it combines good strength with a low power-loss 
factor. Structurally, it’s a stiffened chain of aromatic rings, 
hexagons like the gold one that slides and taps above 
Hilary Bounce’s navel, alternating here and there with 
what are known as heterocyclic rings. 

The origins of Imipolex G are traceable back to early 
research done at du Pont. Plasticity has its grand tradition 
and main stream, which happens to flow by way of du 
Pont and their famous employee Carothers, known as The 
Great Synthesist. His classic study of large molecules 
spanned the decade of the twenties and brought us directly 
to nylon, which not only is a delight to the fetishist and a 
convenience to the armed insurgent, but was also, at the 
time and well within the System, an announcement. of 
Plasticity’s central canon: that chemists were no longer to 
be at the mercy of Nature. They could decide now what 
properties they wanted a molecule to have, and then go 
ahead and build it. At du Pont, the next step after nylon 
was to introduce aromatic rings into the polyamide chain, 
Pretty soon a whole family of “aromatic polymers” had 
arisen: aromatic polyamides, polycarbonates, polyethers, 
polysulfanes. The target property most often seemed to be 
strength—first among Plasticity’s virtuous triad of Strength, 
Stability and Whiteness (Kraft, Standfestigkeit, WeiBe: 
how often these were taken for Nazi graffiti, and indeed 
how indistinguishable they commonly were on the rain- 
brightened walls, as the busses clashed gears in the next 
street over, and the trams creaked of metal, and the peo- 
ple were mostly silent in the rain, with the early evening 
darkened to the texture of smoke from a pipe, and the 
arms of young passersby not in the sleeves of their coats 


a 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 291 


but inside somewhere, as if sheltering midgets, or ecstati- 
cally drifted away from the timetable into a tactile affair 
with linings more seductive even than the new nylon...). 
L. Jamf, among others, then proposed, logically, dialec- 
tically, taking the parental polyamide sections of the new 
chain, and looping them around into rings too, giant 
“heterocyclic” rings, to alternate with the aromatic rings. 
This principle was easily extended to other precursor 
molecules. A desired monomer of high molecular weight 
could be synthesized to order, bent into its heterocyclic 
ring, clasped, and strung in a chain along with the more 
“natural” benzene or aromatic rings. Such chains would be 
known as “aromatic heterocyclic polymers.” One hypo- 
thetical chain that Jamf came up with, just before the war, 
was later modified into Imipolex G. 

Jamf at the time was working for a Swiss outfit called 
Psychochemie AG, originally known as the Gréssli Chemi- 
cal Corporation, a spinoff from Sandoz (where, as every 
schoolchild knows, the legendary Dr. Hofmann made his 
important discovery). In the early ’20s, Sandoz, Ciba, and 
Geigy had got together in a Swiss chemical cartel. Shortly 
after, Jamf’s firm was also absorbed. Apparently, most of 
Gréssli’s contracts had been with Sandoz, anyway. As 
early as 1926 there were oral agreements between the 
Swiss cartel and IG Farben. When the Germans set up 


' their cover company in Switzerland, IG Chemie, two years 


later, a majority of the Grdssli stock was sold to them, and 
the company reconstituted as Psychochemie AG. The 
patent for Imipolex G was thus cross-filed for both the 
IG and for Psychochemie. Shell Oil got into it through an 
agreement with Imperial Chemicals dated 1939. For some 
curious reason, Slothrop will discover, no agreements be- 
tween ICI and the 1C seem to be dated any later than 
*g9. In this Imipolex agreement, Icy Eye could market the 
new plastic inside the Commonwealth in exchange for one 
pound and other good and valuable consideration. That’s 
nice. Psychochemie AG is still around, still doing business 


_ at the same old address in the Schokoladestrasse, in that 


Zurich, Switzerland. 
Slothrop swings the long keychain of his zoot, in some 


_ agitation. A few things are immediately obvious. There is 


a even more being zeroed in on him from out there than 


292 Gravity's RAINBOW 


he’d thought, even in his most paranoid spells. Imipolex G 
shows up on a mysterious “insulation device” on a rocket 
being fired with the help of a transmitter on the roof of 
the headquarters of Dutch Shell, who is co-licensee for 
marketing the Imipolex—a rocket whose propulsion system 
bears an uncanny resemblance to one developed by British 
Shell at around the same time...and oh, oh boy, it just 
occurs to Slothrop now where all the rocket intelligence is 
being gathered—into the office of who but Mr. Duncan 
Sandys, Churchill’s own son-in-law, who works out of the 
Ministry of Supply located where but at Shell Mex House, 
for Christ’s sake.... 

Here Slothrop stages a brilliant Commando raid, along 
with faithful companion Blodgett Waxwing, on Shell Mex 
House itself—right into the heart of the Rocket’s own 
branch office in London. Mowing down platoons of heavy 
security with his little Sten, kicking aside nubile and 
screaming WRAC secretaries (how else is there to react, 
even in play?), savagely looting files, throwing Molotov 
cocktails, the Zootsuit Zanies at last crashing into the final 
sanctum with their trousers up around their armpits, smell- 
ing singed hair, spilled blood, to find not Mr. Duncan 
Sandys cowering before their righteousness, nor open win- 
dow, gypsy flight, scattered fortune cards, nor even a test 
of wills with the great Consortium itself—but only a rather 
dull room, business machines arrayed around the walls 
calmly blinking, files of cards pierced frail as sugar faces, 
frail as the last German walls standing without support 
after the bombs have been and now twisting high above, 
threatening to fold down out of the sky from the force of 
the wind that has blown the smoke away. ... The smell of 
firearms is in the air, and there’s not an office dame in 
sight. The machines chatter and ring to each other. It’s 
time to snap down your brims, share a postviolence ciga- 
rette and think about escape... do you remember the way 
in, all the twists and turns? No. You weren’t looking. Any 
of these doors might open you to safety, but there may 
not be time.... | 

But Duncan Sandys is only a name, a function in this, 
“How high does it goP” is not even the |right kind of 
question to be asking, because the organization charts have 
all been set up by Them, the titles and names filled in by 
Them, because 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 293 


Proverbs for Paranoids, 3: If they can get you asking 
the wrong questions, they don’t have to worry about 
answers. 

Slothrop finds he has paused in front of the blue parts 
list that started all this. How high does it go... ahhhh. 
The treacherous question is not meant to apply to people 
after all, but to the hardware! Squinting, moving a finger 
carefully down the columns, Slothrop finds that Vorrich- 
tung fir die Isolierung’s Next Higher Assembly. 

“S-Gerat, 11/00000.” 

If this number is the serial number of a rocket, as its 
form indicates, it must be a special model—Slothrop hasn’t 
even heard of any with four zeroes, let alone five... nor 
an S-Gerdt either, there’s an I- and a J-Gerit, they’re in 
the guidance... well, Document SG-1, which isn’t sup- 
posed to exist, must cover that... . 

Out of the room: going noplace special, moving to a 
slow drumbeat in his stomach muscles see what happens, 
be ready.... In the Casino restaurant, not the slightest 
impedance at all to getting in, no drop in temperature 
- perceptible to his skin, Slothrop sits down at a table 
where somebody has left last Tuesday’s London Times. 
Hmmm. Hasn’t seen one of them in a while.... Leafing 
through, dum, dum, de-doo, yeah, the War’s still on, Allies 
closing in east and west on Berlin, powdered eggs still 
going one and three a dozen, “Fallen Officers,” MacGregor, 
Mucker-Matfiick, Whitestreet, Personal Tributes... Meet 
Me in St. Louis showing at the Empire Cinema (recalls 
doing the penis-in-the-popcorn-box routine there with one 
Madelyn, who was less than—)— 

Tantivy ...Oh shit no, no wait— 

“True charm . . humble-mindedness ... strength of 
character .. 5 fundamental Christian cleanness and good- 
mess... we all loved. Oliver. . his courage, kindness of 
heart and unfailing good humour were an inspiration to all 
of us... died bravely in battle leading a gallant attempt 
to rescue members of his unit who were pinned down by 
German artillery . . ” And signed by his most devoted 
comrade in arms, Theodore Bloat. Major Theodore Bloat 
now— 

Staring out the window, staring at nothing, gripping a 
table knife so hard maybe some bones of his hand will 
break. It happens sometimes to lepers. Failure of feed- 


294 Gravity’s Rainsow 


back to the brain—no way to know how fiercely they may 
be making a fist. You know these lepers. Well— 

Ten minutes later, back up in his room, he’s lying face- 
down on the bed, feeling empty. Can’t cry. Can’t do 
anything. 

They did it. Took his friend out to some deathtrap, 
probably let him fake an “honourable” death... and then 
just closed up his file... . 

It will occur to him later that maybe the whole story 
was a lie. They could’ve planted it easy enough in that 
London Times, couldn’t they? Left the paper for Slothrop 
to find? But by the time he figures that one out, there'll be 
no turing around. 

At noon Hilary Bounce comes in rubbing his eyes wear- 
ing a shit-eating grin. “How was your evening? Mine was 
remarkable,” 

“Glad to hear it.” Slothrop is smiling. You're on my list 
too, pal. This smile asks from him more grace than any- 
thing in his languid American life ever has, up till now. 
Grace he always imagined himself short on. But it’s work- 
ing. He’s surprised, and so grateful that he almost starts 
crying then. The best part of all is not that Bounce ap- 
pears fooled by the smile, but that Slothrop knows now 
that it will work for him again. ... 

So he does make it to Nice, after a fast escape down 
the Corniche through the mountains fishtailing and rubber 
softly screeching at the sun-warmed abysses, tails all shaken 
back on the beach where he was thoughtful enough to lend 
his buddy Claude the assistant chef, about the same height 
and build, his own brand-new pseudo-Tahitian bathing 
trunks, and while they’re all watching that Claude, find a 
black Citroén with the keys left in, nothing to it, folks— 
rolling into town in his white zoot, dark glasses, and a 
flopping Sydney Greenstreet Panama hat. He’s not exactly 
inconspicuous among the crowds of military and the mam- 
zelles already shifted into summer dresses, but he ditches 
the car off Place Garibaldi, heads for a bistro on the old- 
Nice side of La Porte Fausse and takes time to nab a roll 
and coffee before setting out to find the address Waxwing 
gave him. It turns out to be an ancient fdur-story hotel 
with early drunks lying in the hallways, eyelids like tiny 
loaves brushed with a last glaze of setting sun, and sum- 


rs 
d Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 295 


mertime dust in stately evolutions through the taupe light, 
summertime ease to the streets outside, April summertime 
as the great’ vortex of redeployment from Europe to Asia 
hoots past leaving many souls each night to cling a bit 
longer to the tranquillities here, this close to the drain- _ 

' hole of Marseilles, this next-to-last stop on the paper cy- 
clone that sweeps them back from Germany, down the 
river-valleys, beginning to drag some from Antwerp and 
the northern ports too now as the vortex grows more sure, 
as preferential paths are set up... . Just for the knife-edge, 
‘here in the Rue Rossini, there comes to Slothrop the best 
feeling dusk in a foreign city can bring: just where the 
sky’s light balances the electric lamplight in the street, 
just before the first star, some promise ‘of events without 
cause, surprises, a direction at right angles to every direc- 
tion his life has been able to find up till now. 

-Too impatient to wait for the first star, Slothrop enters 
the hotel. The carpets are dusty, the place smells of alco- 
hol and bleach. Sailors and girls come ambling through, 
together and separate, as Slothrop paranoids from door to 
door looking for one that might have something to tell him. 
Radios play in the heavy wood rooms. The stairwell doesn’t 
appear to be plumb, but tilted at some peculiar angle, and 
the light running down the walls is of only two colors: 
earth and leaf. Up on the top floor Slothrop finally spots an 
old motherly femme de chambre on the way into a room 
carrying a change of linen, very white in the gloom. 

“Why did you leave,” the sad whisper ringing as’ if 
through a telephone receiver from someplace far away, 
“they wanted to help you. They wouldn’t have done any- 
thing bad... .” Her hair is rolled up, George Washington 
style, all the way around. She gazes at 45° to Slothrop, 
a patient, parkbench chessplayer’s gaze, very large, arch- 
ing kindly nose and bright eyes: she is starch, sure-boned, 
the toes of her leather shoes turn up slightly, she’s wear- 
ing red-and-white striped socks on enormous feet that give - 
her the look of a helpful critter from one of the other 
worlds, the sort of elf who'd not only make shoes while 
you slept but also sweep up a little, have the pot on when 

_ you awoke, and maybe a fresh flower by the window— 
_ “I beg your pardon?” 
_ “There’s still time.” 


‘ 


® 


296 Graviry’s RAINBOW - 


“You don’t understand. They’ve killed a friend of mine.” 
But seeing it in the Times that way, so public... how 
could any of that be real, real enough to convince him 
Tantivy won’t just come popping in the door’some day, 
howdyfoax and a bashful smile... hey, Tantivy. Where 
were you? ' ; 

“Where was I, Slothrop? That’s a good one.” His smile 
~ lighting the time again, and the world all free. ... 

He flashes Waxwing’s card. The old woman breaks into 
an amazing smile, the two teeth left in her head under the 
night’s new bulbs. She thumbs him upstairs and then gives 
him either the V-for-victory sign or some spell from distant 
countryside against the evil eye that sours the milk. Which- 
ever it is, she is chuckling sarcastically. - 

Upstairs is a roof, a kind of penthouse in the middle. 
Three young men with Apache sideburns and a young 
woman packing a braided leather sap are sitting in front of 
the entrance smoking a thin cigarette of ambiguous odor. 
“You are lost, mon ami.” 

“Uh, well,” out with Waxwing’s card again. 

“Ah, bien....” They roll aside, and he passes into a 
bickering of canary-yellow Borsalini, corksoled comicbook 
shoes with enormous round toes, lotta that saddle-stitching 
in contrasting colors (such as orange on blue, and the 
perennial favorite, green on magenta), workaday groans of 
comforted annoyance commonly heard in public toilets, 
telephone traffic inside clouds of cigar smoke. Waxwing 
isn’t in, but a colleague interrupts some loud dealing soon 
as he sees the card. 

“What do you need?” 

“Carte d’identité, passage to Ziirich, Switzerland.” 

“Tomorrow.” 

“Place to sleep.” 

The man hands over a key to one of the rooms down- 
stairs. “Do you have any money?” 

“Not much. I don’t know when I could—” 

Count, squint, riffle, “Here.” ) 

Peat. . 

“It’s all right, it’s not a loan. It comes out of overhead. 
Now, don’t go outside, don’t get drunk, stay away from 
the girls who work here.” 

“AW iis” 


, 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 297 


“See you tomorrow.” Back to business. 

Slothrop’s night passes uncomfortably. There is no posi- 
tion he can manage to sleep in for more than ten minutes. 
The bugs sally out onto his body in skirmish parties not 
uncoordinated with his level of wakefulness. Drunks come 
to the door, drunks and revenants. 

“Rone, you've gotta let me in, it’s Dumpster, Dumpster 
Villard.” 

“What's ’at—” 

“It's really bad tonight. I’m sorry. I shouldn’t impose 
this way, I’m more trouble than I’m worth... listen... 
Tm cold... Ive been a long way....” 

A sharp knock. “Dumpster—”’ 

“No, no, it’s Murray Smile, I was next to you in basic, 
company 84, remember? Our serial numbers are only two 
digits apart.” 

“I had to let...let Dumpster in... where'd he go? 
Was I asleep?” 

“Don’t tell them I was here. I just came to tell you you 
don’t have to go back.” 

“Really? Did they say it was all right?” 

“Tt’s all right.” 

“Yeah, but did they say it was?” Silence. “Hey? Mur- 
ray?” Silence. 

The wind is blowing in the ironwork very strong, and 
down in the street a vegetable crate bounces end over end, 
wooden, empty, dark. It must be four in the morning. 
“Got to get back, shit I’m late... .” 

“No.” Only a whisper.... But it was her “no” that 
stayed with him. 

“Whozat. Jenny? That you, Jenny?” 

“Yes it’s me. Oh love I’m so glad I found you.” 

“But I have to...” Would They ever let her live with 
him at the Casino. ct 

“No. I can’t.” But ‘what's wrong with her voice? 

“Jenny, I heard your block was hit, somebody told me, 
the day after New Year’s...a rocket... and I meant to 
go back and see if you were all right, but... I just didn’t 
...and then They took me to that Casino....” 

“Tt’s all right.” 

“But not if I didn’t—” 

“Just don’t go back to them.” 


ce 


298 GRAVITY’S RaInsow 


And somewhere, dark fish hiding past angles of refrac- 
tion in the flow tonight, are Katje and Tantivy, the two 
visitors he wants most to see. He tries to bend the voices 
that come to the door, bend them like notes on a har- 
monica, but it won’t work. What he wants lies too deep. ... 

Just before dawn knocking comes very loud, hard as 
steel. Slothrop has the sense this time to keep quiet. 

“Come on, open up.” 

“MPs, open up.” 

American voices, country voices, high-pitched and with- 
out mercy. He lies freezing, wondering if the bedsprings 
will give him away. For possibly the first time he is hear- 
ing America as it must sound to a non-American. Later he 
will recall that what surprised him most was the fanaticism, 
the reliance not just on flat force but on the rightness of 
what they planned to do’... he'd been told long ago to 
expect this sort of thing from Nazis, and especially from 
Japs—we were the ones who always played fair—but this 
pair outside the door now are as demoralizing as a close-up 
of John Wayne (the angle emphasizing how slanted his 
eyes are, funny you never noticed before) screaming 
“BANZAI!” 

“Wait a minute Ray, there he goes—” 

“Hopper! You asshole, come back here—” | 

“You'll never get me in a strait jacket agaaaaain....” 
Hopper’s voice goes fading around the corner as the MPs 
take off in pursuit. 

It dawns on Slothrop, literally, through the yellowbrown 
window shade, that this is his first day Outside. His first 
free morning. He doesn’t have to go back. Free? What’s 
free? He falls asleep at last. A little before noon a young 
woman let herself in with a passkey and leaves him the 
papers. He is now an English war correspondent named 
Ian Scuffling. 

“This is the address of one of our people in Ziirich. 
evans wishes you good luck and asks what kept you so 
long.” 

“You mean he wants an answer?” 

“He said you'd have to think about it.” 

“Sa-a-a-ay.” It’s just occurred to him. “Why are all you 
folks helping me like this? For free and all?”| ae 

“Who knows? We have to play the patterns. There 
must be a pattern you're in, right now.” 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 299 


“Oh ait 

But she’s already left. Slothrop looks around the place: 
in the daylight it’s mean and anonymous. Even the 
roaches must be uncomfortable here.... Is he off so 
quickly, like Katje on her wheel, off on a ratchet of rooms 
like this, to be in each one only long enough to gather 
wind or despair enough to move on to the next, but no 
way backward now, ever again? No time even to get to 
know the Rue Rossini, which faces holler from the win- 
dows, where’s a good place to eat, what’s the name of the 
song everybody's whistling these premature summer 
days.... 


A week later he’s in Ziirich, after a long passage by 
train. While the metal creatures in their solitude, days of 
snug and stable fog, pass the hours at mime, at playing 
molecules, imitating industrial synthesis as they are broken 
up; put together, coupled and recoupled, he dozes in and 
out of a hallucination of Alps, fogs, abysses, tunnels, bone- 
deep laborings up impossible grades, cowbells in the dark- 
ness, in the morning green banks, smells of wet pasture, 
‘always out the windows an unshaven work crew on the 
way to repair some stretch of track, long waits in marshal- 
-ing-yards whose rails run like layers of an onion cut end to 
end, gray and desolate places, nights of whistles, coupling, 
crashes, sidings, staring cows on the evening hillsides, army 
convoys waiting at the crossings as the train puffs by, 
never a clear sense of nationality anywhere, nor even of 
belligerent sides, only the War, a single damaged land- 
scape, in which “neutral Switzerland” is a rather stuffy 
convention, observed but with as much sarcasm as “lib- 
erated France” or “totalitarian Germany,” “Fascist Spain,” 
and others. ... 

The War has been reconfiguring time and space into its 
own image. The track runs in different networks now. 
What appears to be destruction is really the shaping of 
railroad spaces to other purposes, intentions he can only, 
riding through it for the first time, begin to feel the lead- 
ing edges of.... 

He checks in to the Hotel Nimbus, in an obscure street 
in the Niederdorf or cabaret section of Ziirich. The room’s 
in an attic, and is reached by ladder. There’s also a ladder 


outside the window, so he reckons it’ll be O.K. When 


ay ‘ 


300 : Gravity's RAINBOW 


night comes down he goes out looking for the local Wax- 
wing rep, finds him farther up the Limmatquai, under a 
bridge, in rooms full of Swiss watches, clocks and altim- 
eters. He’s a Russian named Semyavin, Outside boats hoot 
on the river and the lake. Somebody upstairs is practicing 
on a piano: stumbling, sweet lieder. Semyavin pours gen- 
tian brandy into cups of tea he’s just brewed. “First thing 
you have to understand is the way everything here is 
specialized. If it’s watches, you go to one café. If it’s 
women, you go to another. Furs are subdivided into Sable, 
Ermine, Mink, and Others. Same with dope: Stimulants, 
Depressants, Psychomimetics. ... What is it you're after?” 

“Uh, information?” Gee, this stuff tastes like Moxie. ... 

“Oh. Another one.” Giving Slothrop a sour look. “Life 
was simple before the first war. You wouldn’t remember. 
Drugs, sex, luxury items. Currency in those days was no 
more than a sideline, and the term ‘industrial espionage’ 
was unknown. But I’ve seen it change—oh, how it’s 
changed. The German inflation, that should’ve been my 
clue right there, zeros strung end to end from here to 
Berlin. I would have stern talks with myself. “Semyavin, 
it’s only a temporary lapse away from reality. A small 
aberration, nothing to worry about. Act as you always 
have—strength of character, good mental health. Courage, 
Semyavin! Soon all will be back to normal.’ But do you 
know what?” 

“Let me guess.” 

A tragic sigh. “Information. What’s wrong with dope 
and women? Is it any wonder the world’s gone insane, 
with information come to be the only real medium of ex- 
change?” 

“T thought it was cigarettes.” 

“You dream.” He brings out a list of Ziirich cafés and 
gathering spots. Under Espionage, Industrial, Slothrop 
finds three. Ultra, Lichtspiel, and Straggeli. They are on 
both banks of the Limmat, and widely spaced. 

“Footwork,” folding the list in an oversize zoot-suit 
pocket. 

“It'll get easier. Someday it'll all be done by machine. — 
Information machines. You are the wave ofthe future.” 

Begins a period of shuttling among the three cafés, — 
sitting a few hours over coffee at each one, eating once a — 


| 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 301 


day, Ziirich baloney and risti at the People’s Kitchens... 
watching crowds of businessmen in blue suits, sun-black 
skiers who've spent the duration schussing miles of glacier 
and snow hearing nothing of campaigns or politics, read- 
ing nothing but thermometers and weathervanes, finding 
their atrocities in avalanches or toppling séracs, their vic- 
tories in layers of good powder... ragged foreigners in 
oil-stained leather jackets and tattered fatigues, South 
Americans bundled in fur coats and shivering in the clear 
sunlight, elderly hypochondriacs who were caught out 
lounging at some spa when the War began and have been 
here since, women in long black dresses who don’t smile, 
men in soiled overcoats who do...and the mad, down 
from their fancy. asylums on weekend furlough—oh, the 
mental cases of Switzerland: Slothrop is known to them, 
all right, among all the somber street faces and colors only 
he is wearing white, shoes zoot ’n’ hat, white as the 
cemetery mountains here.... He’s also the New Mark In 
Town. It’s difficult for him to sort out the first wave of 
corporate spies from the 


Loonies on LzEAvE! 


(The Chorus line is divided not into the conventional Boys and 
Girls but into Keepers and Nuts, without regard to sex, though all 
four possibilities are represented on stage. Many are wearing sun- 
glasses with black lenses and white rims, not so much to be fashion- 
able as to suggest snow-blindness, the antiseptic white of the 
Clinic, perhaps even the darkness of the mind. But all seems 
happy, relaxed, informal . . . no sign of repression, not even a 
distinction in costume so that at first there is some problem telling 
Nuts from Keepers as they all burst in from the wings dancing 
and singing): 


Here we come foax—ready or not! 

Put your mask on, and plot your plot, 

We're just laughin’ and droolin’, all—over 
the sleigh, 

Like a buncha happy midgets on a holiday! 


Oh we’re the LOONIES ON LEAVE, and 
We haven’t a care— 
Our brains at the cleaners, our souls at the Fair, 7 
Just freaks on a fur-lough, away from the blues, 
As daffy and sharp as—the taps on our shoes! 
Hey, we’re passin’ the hat for—your frowns and 
your tears, 


302 GRavIty’s Ramnsow 


And the fears you thought’d never go *way— 

Oh take it from a loony, life’s so dear and swoony, 

So just hug it and kiss it to-day] 

La-da-da, ya-ta ya-ta ta-ta ke... (They goon 
humming the tune behind what follows): 


First Nut (or maybe Keeper): Got an amazing deal for you here, 
American? I thought so, always tell a face from home, saaay, like 
your suit there, go far enough up the glacier ’n’ nobody’d be able 
to see yal Well yes now, I know how you feel about these street- 
vendors keep coming by, it’s the old threé-card monte on the side- 
walk [trucks across the stage for a while, back and forth, waving 
’ his finger in the air, singing “Three-card monte on-the side, w 
over and over in the same obsessive monotone, for as many repe- 
titions as he can get away with] and you can spot right away what’s 
wrong, every one promises ya somethin’ fer nothin’, right? yes 
now oddly enough, that’s the main objection engineers and scien- 
tists have always had to the idea of [lowering his voice] perpetual 
motion or as we like to call it Entropy Management—here, here’s 
our card—well, sure, they’ve got a point. At least they had a 
point. Up till now. ete 


Second Nut or Keeper: Now you’ve heard about the two-hundred- 
mile-per-gallon carburetor, the razor edge that never gets dull, 
the eternal bootsole, the mange pill that’s good to your glands, 
engine that’ll run on sand, ornithopters and robobopsters—you 
heard me, got a little goatee made out of steel wool—jivey, that’s 
fine, but here’s one for yo’ mind! Are you ready? It’s Lightning- 
Latch, The Door That Opens You! 


Slothrop: Think I'll go take my nap now. ... 


Third N. or K.: Transmogrify common air into diamonds through 
Cataclysmic Carbon Dioxide Reducti-o-0-0-0-n-n-n. ... 


If he were sensitive about such things, it'd all be pretty 
insulting, this first wave. It passes, gesturing, accusative, 
pleading. Slothrop manages to stay calm. There is a 
pause—then on come the real ones, slowly at first but 
gathering, gathering. Synthetic rubber or gasoline, elec- 
tronic calculators, aniline dyes, acrylics, perfumes (stolen 
essences in vials in sample cases), sexual habits of a hun- 
dred selected board members, layouts of plants, code- 
books, connections and payoffs, ask for it, they can get it. 

At last, one day at the Straggeli, Slothrop eating on a 
bratwurst and hunk of bread he’s been toting around all 
morning in a paper bag, suddenly from noplace appears 
one Mario Schweitar in a green frogged' waistcoat, just 
popped out of the echoing cuckoo clock of Dubya Dubya — 
Two here, the endless dark corridors at his back, with a 


j 


ie 
cue 


/ Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 303 


’ change of luck for Slothrop. “Psst, Joe,” he begins, “hey, 
mister.” 

“Not me,” replies Slothrop with his mouth full. 

“You interested in some L.S.D.?” 

“That stands for pounds, shillings, and pence. You got 
the wrong café, Ace.” 

“I think I’ve got the wrong country,” Schweitar a little 
mournful. “I’m from Sandoz.” 

“Aha, Sandoz!” cries Slothrop, and pulls out a chair for 
the fella. 

Turns out Schweitar is very tight indeed with Psycho- 
chemie AG, being one of those free-floating trouble-shoot- 
ers around the Cartel, working for them on a per diem 
basis and spying on the side. 

“Well,” Slothrop sez, “I'd sure like anything they got on 
L. Jamf, a-and on that Imipolex G.” 

“Gaaah—” 

“Pardon me?” 

“That stuff. Forget it. It’s not even our line. You ever 
try to develop a polymer when there’s nothing but indole 
people around? With our giant parent to the north sending 
in ultimatums every day? Imipolex G is the company alba- 
tross, Yank. They have vice-presidents whose only job is 

_to observe the ritual of going out every Sunday to spit on 
old Jamf’s grave. You haven’t spent much time with the 
indole crowd. They’re very elitist. They see themselves at 
the end of a long European dialectic, generations of 
blighted grain, ergotism, witches on broomsticks, com- 
munity orgies, cantons lost up there in folds of mountain 
that haven’t known an unhallucinated day in the last 500 
years—keepers of a tradition, aristocrats—” 

“Wait a minute... .” Jamf dead? “You say Jamf’s grave, 
now?” It ought to be making more of a difference to him, 
except that the man was never really alive so how can he 
be really— 

“Up in the mountains, toward the Uetliberg.” 

“You ever—” 

“What?” 

_ “Did you ever meet him?” 
_ “Before my time. But I know that there’s a lot of data 
on him in the classified files at Sandoz. It would be some 

6 job eetting you what you want. . 


304 Graviry’s RAINBOW | 


“Five hundred.” 

“Five hundred what?” 

Swiss francs. Slothrop hasn’t got 500 anything, unless 
it’s worries. The money from Nice is almost gone. He heads 
toward Semyavin’s, across the Gemiise-Briicke, .deciding 
he'll walk everywhere from now on, chewing his white 
sausage and wondering when he'll see another. 

“First thing you want to do,” Semyavin advises him, “is 
go to a pawnshop and raise a few francs on that, ah,” 
pointing to the suit. Aw no, not the suit. Semyavin goes 
rummaging in a back room, comes out with a bundle of 
workmen’s clothes. “You should start thinking more about 
your visibility. Come back tomorrow, I'll see what else I 
can find.” 

White zoot in a bundle under his arm, a less visible Ian 
Scuffling goes back outside, down into the mediaeval after- 
noon of the Niederdorf, stone walls now developing like 
baking bread in the failing sun, oboy oboy he can see it 
now: gonna turn into another of them Tamara/Italo drills 
here, ’n’ then he’ll bein so deep he'll just never get out.... 

At the entrance to his street, in the wells of shadow, he 
notes a black Rolls parked, motor idling, its glass tinted 
and afternoon so dark he can’t see inside. Nice car. First 
one he’s seen in a while, should be no more than a curios- 
ity, except for 

Proverbs for Paranoids, 4: You hide, they seek. ; 

Zunnggg! diddilung, diddila-ta-ta-ta, ya-ta-ta-ta William 
Tell Overture here, back in the shadows, hope nobody was 
looking through that one-way glass—zoom, zoom, dodging 
around corners, scooting down alleys, no sound of pursuit 
but then it’s the quietest engine on the road except for the 
King Tiger tank.... 

Forget that Hotel Nimbus, he reckons. His feet are al- 
ready starting to bother him. He gets to the Luisentrasse 
and the hockshop just before closing time, and manages to 
raise a little, baloney for a day or two maybe, on the zoot. 
So long zoot. : 

This town sure closes up early. What does Slothrop do 
tonight for a bed? He has a moment's relapse into opti- 
mism; ducks in a restaurant and rings up desk at the 
Hotel Nimbus. “Ah, yes,” English English) “can you pos- 
sibly tell me if the British chap who’s been waiting in the 
foyer is still there, you know... .” 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 305 


In a minute on comes a pleasant, awkward voice with 
an are-you-there. Oh, so seraphic. Slothrop funks, hangs 
up, stands looking at all the people at dinner staring at 
him—blew it, blew it, now They know he’s on to Them. 
There is the usual chance his paranoia’s just out of hand 
again, but the coincidences are running too close. Besides, 
he knows the sound of Their calculated innocence by now, 
it’s part of Their style. . ... 

Out again in the city: precision banks, churches, Gothic 
doorways drilling by... he must avoid the hotel and the 
three cafés now, right, right.... The permanent Ziirchers 
in early-eyening blue stroll by. Blue as the city twilight, 
deepening blue.... The spies and dealers have all gone 
indoors. Semyavin’s place is out, the Waxwing circle have 
been kind, no point bringing any heat down on them. How 
much weight do the Visitors have in this townP Can 
Slothrop risk checking in to another hotelP Probably not. 

_It’s getting cold. A wind is coming in now off the lake. 

He finds that he has drifted as far as the Odeon, one of 
the great world cafés, whose specialty is not listed any- 
where—indeed has never been pinned down.’ Lenin, 
Trotsky, James Joyce, Dr. Einstein all sat out at these 
tables. Whatever it was they all had in common: whatever 
they'd come to this vantage to score... perhaps it had to 
do with the people somehow, with pedestrian mortality, 
restless crisscrossing of needs or desperations in one fateful 
piece of street ... dialectics, matrices, archetypes all need 
to connect, once in a while, back to some of that prole- 
tarian blood, to body odors and senseless screaming across 
a table, to cheating and last. hopes, or else all is dusty 
Dracularity, the West’s ancient curse.... 

Slothrop finds he has enough spare change for coffee. 
He goes sits inside, choosing a seat that'll face the en- 
trance. Fifteen minutes and he’s getting the spy-sign from 
a swarthy, curly-headed alien in a green suit a couple 
tables away. Another front-facer. On his table is an old ~ 
newspaper that appears to be in Spanish. It is open to a 
peculiar political cartoon of a line of middle-aged men 
wearing dresses and wigs, inside the police station where 
‘a cop is holding a loaf of white...no it’s a baby, with 
a label on its diaper sez LA REVOLUCION... oh, they’re all 
claiming the infant revolution as their own, all these poli- 
ticians bickering like a bunch of putative mothers, and 


4 


a 


306 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


somehow this cartoon here is supposed to be some kind of 
a touchstone, this fella in the green suit, who turns out to 
be an Argentine named Francisco Squalidozzi, is looking 
for a reaction... the key passage is at the very end of the 
line where the great Argentine poet Leopoldo Lugones is 
saying, “Now I’m going to tell you, in verse, how I con- 
ceived her free from the stain of Original Sin... .” It is 
the Uriburu revolution of 1930. The paper is fifteen years 
old. There is no telling what Squalidozzi is expecting from 
Slothrop, but what he gets is pure ignorance. This seems 
to be acceptable, and presently the Argentine has loosened 
up enough to confide that he and a dozen colleagues, 
among them the international eccentric Graciela Imago 
Portales, hijacked an early-vintage German U-boat in Mar 
del Plata a few weeks ago, and have sailed it back across 
the Atlantic now, to seek political asylum in Germany, as 
soon as the War's over there. ... 

“You say Germany? You gone goofy? It’s a mess there, 
Jackson!” 

“Not nearly the mess we left back home,” the sad 
Argentine replies. Long lines have appeared next to his 
mouth, lines learned from living next to thousands of horses, 
watching too many doomed colts and sunsets south, of 
Rivadavia, where the true South begins.... “It’s been a 
mess since the colonels took over. Now, with Perén on his 
way...our last hope was Accién Argentina,” what's he 
talking about, Jesus I'm hungry, “...suppressed it a 
month after the coup... now everybody waits. Attending 
the street actions out of habit. No real hope. We decided 
to move before Perén got another portfolio. War, most 
likely. He already has the descamisados, this will give him 
the Army too you see... it’s only a matter of time... we 
could have gone to Uruguay, waited him out—it’s a tradi- 
tion. But perhaps he will be in for a long time. Montevideo ~ 
is swarming with failed exiles, and failed hopes. . ..” 3 

“Yeah, but Germany—that’s the last place you want to 


“Pero ché, no sés argentino....” A long look away, 
down the engineered scars of Swiss avenues, looking for 
the South he left. Not the same Argentine, Slothrop, that — 
that Bob Eberle’s seen toasts to Tangerine raised in ev-ry 
bar across, now. ... Squalidozzi wants to say: We of all 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 307 


’ magical precipitates out of Europe’s groaning, clouded 


adlembic, we are the thinnest, the most. dangerous, the 
handiest to secular uses... . We tried to exterminate our 
Indians, like you: we wanted the closed white version of 


reality we got—but even into the smokiest labyrinths, the 
\ furthest stacked density of midday balcony or courtyard 


and gate, the land has never let us forget.... But what he 
asks aloud is: “Here—you look hungry. Have you eaten? 
I was about to go to supper. Would you do me the honor?” 

In the Kronenhalle they find a table upstairs. The eve- 
ning rush is tapering off. Sausages and fondue: Slothrop’s 
starving. 

“In the days of the gauchos, my country was a blank 
piece of paper. The pampas stretched as far as men could 
imagine, inexhaustible, fenceless. Wherever the gaucho 
could ride, that place belonged to him, But Buenos Aires 
sought hegemony over the provinces. All the neuroses 
about property gathered strength, and began to infect the 
countryside. Fences went up, and the gaucho became less 
free. It is our national tragedy. We are obsessed with 
building labyrinths, where before there was open plain and 
sky. To draw ever more complex patterns on the blank 
sheet. We cannot abide that openness: it is terror to us. 
Look at Borges. Look at the suburbs of Buenos Aires. The 
tyrant Rosas has been dead a century, but his cult flour- 
ishes. Beneath the city streets, the warrens of rooms and 
corridors, the fences and the networks of steel track, the 
Argentine heart, in its perversity and guilt, longs for a 
return to that first unscribbled serenity... that anarchic 
oneness of pampas and sky....” 

“But-but bobwire,” Slothrop with his mouth full of that 
fondue, just gobblin’ away, “that’s progress—you, you 
can’t have open range forever, you can’t just stand in the 
way of progress—” yes, he is actually going to go on for 
half an hour, quoting Saturday-afternoon western movies 
dedicated to Property if anything is, at this foreigner who’s 
springing for his meal. 

Squalidozzi, taking it for mild insanity instead of rude- 
ness, only blinks once or twice. “In ordinary times,” he 


wants to explain, “the center always wins. Its power grows 


with time, and that can’t be reversed, not by ordinary 


~ means. Decentralizing, back toward anarchism, needs ex- 


308 Gravity’s Rainsow 


traordinary times... this War—this incredible War—just 
for the moment has wiped | out the proliferation of little 
states that’s prevailed in Germany for a thousand years, 
Wiped it clean. Opened it.” 

“Sure. For how long?” 

“It won't last. Of course not. But for a few months... 
perhaps there'll be peace by the autumn—disctilpeme, the 
spring, I still haven’t got used to your hemisphere—for a 
moment of spring, perhaps... .” 

“Yeah but—what’re you gonna do, take over land and 
try to hold itP They'll run you right off, podner.” 

“No. Taking land is building more fences. We want to 
leave it open. We want it to grow, to change. In the 
openness of the German Zone, our hope is limitless.” Then, 
as if struck on the forehead, a sudden fast glance, not at 
the door, but up at the ceiling— “So is our danger.” 

The U-boat right now is cruising around somewhere off 
of Spain, staying submerged for much of the day, spend- 
ing nights on the surface to charge batteries, sneaking in 
now and then to refuel. Squalidozzi won’t go into the fuel- 
ing arrangements in much detail, but there are apparently 
connections of many years’ standing with the Republican 
underground—a community of grace, a gift of persistence. 

.. Squalidozzi is in Ziirich now contacting governments 
that might be willing, for any number of reasons, to assist 
his anarchism-in-exile. He must get a message to Geneva 
by tomorrow: from there word is relayed to Spain and the 
submarine. But there are Peronist agents here in Ziirich. 
He is being watched. He can’t risk betraying the contact 
in Geneva. 

“I can help you out,” Slothrop licking off his fingers, 
“but I’m short of cash and—” 

Squalidozzi names a sum that will pay off Mario Schwei- 
tar and keep Slothrop fed for months to come. 

“Half in front and I’m on the way.” ° 

The Argentine hands over message, addresses, money, 
and springs for the check. They arrange to meet at the 
Kronenhalle in three days. “Good luck.” 

“You too.” 

A last sad look from Squalidozzi alone |at his table. A 

toss of forelock, a fading of light. 


The plane is a battered DC-3, chosen for its affinity for 


Baar. 


| Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 309 


~ moonlight, the kind expression on its windowed face, 
its darkness inside and outside. He wakes up curled among 
the cargo, metal darkness, engine vibration through his 
bones . . . red light filtering very faint back through a bulk- 
head from up forward. He crawls to a tiny window and 
looks out. Alps in the moonlight. Kind of small ones, 
though, not as spectacular as he figured on. Oh, well.... 
He settles back down on a soft excelsior bed, lighting up 
one of Squalidozzi’s corktips thinking, Jeepers, not: bad, 
guys just jump in the airplane, go where they want... 
why stop at Geneva? Sure, what about—well, that Spain? 
no wait, they’re Fascists. South Sea Islands! hmm. Full of 
Japs and Gls. Well Africa’s the Dark Continent, nothing 
there but natives, elephants, *n’ that Spencer Tracy.... 
_ “There’s nowhere to go, Slothrop, nowhere.” The figure 
is huddled against a crate, and shivering. Slothrop squints 
through the weak red light. It is the well-known frontis- 
piece face of insouciant adventurer Richard Halliburton: 
but strangely altered. Down both the man’s cheeks runs a 
‘terrible rash, palimpsested over older pockmarks, in whose 
symmetry Slothrop, had he a medical eye, could have read 
drug reaction. Richard Halliburton’s jodhpurs are torn and 
soiled, his bright hair greasy now and hanging. He appears 
to be weeping silently, bending, a failed angel, over all 
these second-rate Alps, over all the night skiers far below, 
out on the slopes, crisscrossing industriously, purifying and 
perfecting their Fascist ideal of Action, Action, Action, 
once his own shining reason for being. No more. No more. 

Slothrop reaches, puts the cigarette out on the deck. 
How easy these angel-white wood shavings can go up. Lie 
here in this rattling and wrenched airplane, lie still as you 
can, damn fool, yup they've conned you—conned you 
again. Richard Halliburton, Lowell Thomas, Rover and 
Motor Boys, jaundiced stacks of National Geographics up 
in Hogan’s room must’ve all lied to him, and there was no 
one then, not even a colonial ghost in the attic, to tell him 
different... . 
Bump, skid, slew, pancake landing, fucking washouts 

from kite-flying school, gray Swiss dawn light through little 

__ windows and every joint, muscle, and bone in Slothrop is 

' Sore. It’s time to punch back in. 

’ He gets off of the plane without incident, mingling into 


310 Gravity’s RaiInsow 


a yawning, sour flock of early passengers, delivery agents, 
airfield workers. Cointrin in the early morning. Shocking 
green hills one side, brown city on the other. Pavements 
are slick and wet. Clouds blow slowly in the sky. Mont 
Blanc sez hi, lake sez howdy too, Slothrop buys 20 ciga- 
rettes and a local paper, asks directions, gets in a tram that 
comes and with cold air through doors and windows to 
wake him up goes rolling into the City of Peace. : 
He’s to meet his Argentine contact at the Café l’Eclipse, 
well off the trolley lines, down a cobblestone street and 
into a tiny square surrounded by vegetable and fruit stalls 
under beige awnings, shops, other cafés, window-boxes, 
clean hosed sidewalks. Dogs go running in and out of the 
alleys. Slothrop sits with coffee, croissants, and news- 
paper. Presently the overcast burns off. The sun throws 
shadows across the square nearly to where he’s sitting 
with all antennas out. Nobody seems to be watching. He 
waits. Shadows retreat, sun climbs then begins to fall, at 


last his man shows up, exactly as described: suit of Buenos ~ 


Aires daytime black, mustache, goldrim glasses, and 
whistling an old tango by Juan d’Arienzo. Slothrop makes 
a show of searching all his pockets, comes up with the 
foreign bill Squalidozzi told him to use: frowns at it, gets 
up, goes over. 
Como no, sefor, no problem changing a 50-peso note— 
offering a seat, coming out with currency, notebooks, 
cards, pretty soon the tabletop’s littered with pieces of 
paper that eventually get sorted back into pockets so that 
the man has Squalidozzi’s message and Slothrop has one 
to bring back to Squalidozzi. And that’s that. . 
Back to Ziirich on an afternoon train, sleeping most of 


the way. He gets off at Schlieren, some ungodly dark hour, — 


just in case They’re watching the Bahnhof in town, hitches 


a ride in as far as the St. Peterhofstatt. Its great clock 
hangs over him and empty acres of’ streets in what he — 


now reads as dumb malignity. It connects to Ivy League 
quadrangles in his distant youth, clock-towers lit so dim the 
hour could never be read, and a temptation, never so 
strong though as now, to surrender to the darkening year, 
to embrace what he can of real terror to the hour without 


a name (unless it’s...no...NO...): jit was vanity, 


vanity as his Puritan forerunners had known it, bones and 


war 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 311 


heart alert to Nothing, Nothing underneath the college 
saxophones melding sweetly, white blazers lipsticked about 
the lapels, smoke from nervous Fatimas, Castile soap 
vaporizing off of shining hair, and mint kisses, and dewed 
carnations. It was being come for just before dawn by 
pranksters younger than he, dragged from bed, blind- 
folded, Hey Reinhardt, led out into the autumnal cold, 
shadows and leaves underfoot, and the moment then of 
doubt, the real possibility that they are something else— 
that none of it was real before this moment: only elabo- 
rate theatre to fool you. But now the screen has gone dark, 
jand there is absolutely no more time left. The agents are 
here for you at last.... 

What better place than Ziirich to find vanity again? It’s 
Reformation country, Zwingli’s town, the man at the end 
of the encyclopedia, and stone reminders are everywhere. 
Spies and big business, in their element, move tirelessly 
among the grave markers. Be assured there are ex-young 
men, here in this very city, faces Slothrop used to pass in 
the quads, who got initiated at Harvard into the Puritan 
Mysteries: who took oaths in dead earnest to respect and 
to act always in the name of Vanitas, Emptiness, their 
ruler... who now according to life-plan such-and-such 
have come to Switzerland to work for Allen Dulles and 
his “intelligence” network, which operates these days under 
the title “Office of Strategic Services.” But to initiates OSS 
is also a secret acronym: as a mantra for times of im- 
‘mediate crisis they have been taught to speak inwardly 
oss...oss, the late, corrupt, Dark-age Latin word for 

‘bone. . 

"Next day, when Slothrop meets Mario Schweitar at BS 

Striggeli to front him half his fee, he asks also for the 
location of Jamf's grave. And that’s where they arrange to 
close the deal, up in the mountains. 

Squalidozzi doesn’t show up at the Kronenhalle, or the 
Odeon, or anyplace Slothrop will think to look in the days 
that follow. Disappearances, in Ziirich, are not unheard of. 
But Slothrop will keep going back, just in case. The mes- 
‘sage is in Spanish, he can’t make out more than a word or 

“two, but he'll hold on to it, there might be a chance to 
‘a it on. And, well, the anarchist persuasion appeals to 
a little. Back when Shays fought the federal troops 


312 GRAVITY’s RAINBOW 


across Massachusetts, there were Slothrop Regulators 
patrolling Berkshire for the rebels, wearing sprigs of hem- 
lock in their hats so you could tell them from the Govern- 
ment soldiers. Federals stuck a tatter of white paper in 
theirs. Slothrops in those days were not yet so much in- 
-volved with paper, and the wholesale slaughtering of 
trees. They were still for the living green, against the 
dead white. Later they lost, or traded away, knowledge of 
which side they'd been on. Tyrone here has inherited most 
of their bland ignorance on the subject. 

Back behind him now, wind blows through Jamf’s 
crypt. Slothrop’s been camped here these past few nights, 
nearly out of money, waiting for word from Schweitar. 
Out of the wind, huddled inside a couple of Swiss army 
blankets he managed to promote, he’s even been able to 
sleep. Right on top of Mister Imipolex. The first night he 
was afraid to fall asleep, afraid of a visit from Jamf, whose 
German-scientist mind would be battered by Death to-only 
the most brute reflexes, no way to appeal to the dumb and 
grinning evil of the shell that was left... voices twittering 
with moonlight around his image, as step by step he, It, 
the Repressed, approaches.... waitaminute up out of 
sleep, face naked, turning to the foreign gravestones, the 
what? what was it... back again, almost to it, up again 

.. up, and back, that way, most of the early night. 

There’s no visit. It seems Jamf is only dead. Slothrop 
woke next morning feeling, in spite of an empty stomach 
and a runny nose, better than he had in months. Seemed 
like he’d passed a test, not somebody else’s test, but one of 
his own, for a change. 

The city below him, bathed now in a partial light, is a 
necropolis of church spires and weathercocks, white castle- 
keep. towers, broad buildings with mansard roofs and 
windows glimmering by thousands. This forenoon the 
mountains are as translucent as ice. Later in the day they 
will be blue heaps of wrinkled satin. The lake is mirror- 
smooth but mountains and houses reflec down there 
remain strangely blurred, with edges fine and combed as 
rain: a dream of Atlantis, of the Suggenthal. Toy villages, 
desolate city of painted alabaster. ... lothrop hunkers 
down here in the cold curve of a mountain trail, packing 
and lobbing idle snowballs, not much to do around here 


4 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 313 


but smoke the last butt of what for all he knows is the 
last Lucky Strike in all Switzerland. ... 

Footfalls down the trail. Clinking galoshes. It is Mario 
Schweitar’s delivery boy, with a big fat envelope. Slothrop 
pays him, chisels a cigarette and some matches, and they 
part. Back to the crypt Slothrop relights a small pile of 
kindling and pine boughs, warms up his hands, and begins 
to thumb through the data. The absence of Jamf sur- 
rounds him like an odor, one he knows but can’t quite 
name, an aura that threatens to go epileptic any second. 
The information is here—not as much as he wanted (aw, 
how much was that?) but more than he hoped, being one 
of those practical Yankees. In the weeks ahead, in those 
very few moments he'll be allowed to wallow in his past, 
he may even have time to wish he hadn’t read any. of 
gts). "s 


O 


Mr. Pointsman has decided to spend Whitsun by the sea. 
Feeling a bit megalo these days, nothing to worry about 
really, never gets worse than, oh perhaps the impression, 
whilst zooming along through the corridors of “The White 
Visitation,” that all the others seem to be frozen in atti- 
tudes of unmistakable parkinsonism, with himself the only 
alert, unpalsied one remaining. It is peacetime again now, 
no room for the pigeons in Trafalgar Square on V-E Night, 
everyone at the facility that day mad drunk and hugging 
and kissing, except for the Blavatskian wing of Psi Section, 
who were off on a White Lotos Day pilgrimage to 19 
Avenue Road, St. John’s Wood. 

Now there’s time again for holidays. Though Pointsman 
does feel a certain obligation to go relax, there is also, of 
course, The Crisis, A leader must show self-possession, up 
to and including a holiday mood, in the midst of Crisis. 

There’s now been no word of Slothrop for nearly a 
month, since the fumbling asses in military intelligence 

lost him in Ziirich. Pointsman is a bit browned-off with the 
Firm. His clever strategy appears to’ve failed. In first dis- 
cussions with Clive Mossmoon and the others, it seemed 
foolproof: to let Slothrop escape from the Casino Her- 


314 Graviry’s RAmnsow 


mann Goering, and then rely on Secret Service to keep 
him under surveillance instead of PISCES. An economy 
move. The surveillance bill is the most excruciating thorn 
in the crown of funding problems he seems condemned to 
wear for the duration of this project. Damned funding is 
going to be his downfall, if Slothrop doesn’t drive him 
insane first. 

Pointsman has blundered, Hasn’t even the Tennysonian 
comfort of saying “someone” has blundered. No, it was he 
and he alone who authorized the Anglo-American team of 
Harvey Speed and Floyd Perdoo to investigate a random 
sample of Slothropian sex adventures. Budget was avail- 
able, and what harm could it do? They went off practically 
skipping, obsessive as Munchkins, out into the erotic 
Poisson. Don Giovanni's map of Europe—64o. in Italy, 
231 in Germany, 100 in France, 91 in Turkey but, but, 
but—in Spain! in Spain, 1003!—is Slothrop’s map of Lon- 
don, and the two gumshoes become so infected with the 
prevailing fondness out here for mindless pleasures that 
they presently are passing whole afternoons sitting out in 
restaurant gardens dawdling over chrysanthemum salads 
and mutton casseroles, or larking at the fruit monger’s— 
“Hey Speed, look, canteloupes! I haven’t seen one of them 
since the Third Term—wow, smell this one, it’s beautifull 
Say, how about a canteloupe, Speed? Huh? Come on.” 

“Excellent idea, Perdoo, excellent.” 

“Uh... Oh, well you pick out the one you want, okay?” 

“The one?” 

“Yeah. This is the one,” turning it to show him as the 
faces of threatened girls are roughly tumed by villains, 
“that I picked out, see?” 

“But but I thought we were both going to—” gesturing 
feebly toward what he still cannot quite accept as Perdoo’s 
melon, in whose intaglio net now, as among craters of the 
pale moon, a face is indeed emerging, the face of a cap- 
tive woman with eyes cast downward, lids above as smooth 
as Persian ceilings. ... | 

“Well, no, I usually, uh—” this is embarrassing for 
Perdoo, it’s like being called on to, to justify eating an 
apple, or even popping a grape into your mouth—‘just, 
well, sort of, eat them... whole, you know,” chuckling in 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering BLS 


_ what he hopes is a friendly way, to indicate politely the 


social oddness of this discussion— 

—hbut the chuckle is taken the wrong way by Sdeck: 
taken as evidence of mental instability in this slightly buck- 
toothed and angular American, who is dancing now from 
stoop to English stoop, lank as a street-puppet in the wind. 


’ Shaking his head, he nevertheless selects his own whole 


canteloupe, realizes he’s been left to pay the bill, which is 
exorbitant, and goes skipping off after Perdoo, hippety hop 
both of them, tra-la-la-la slam right into another dead end: 

“Jenny? No—no Jenny here... .” 

“A Jennifer, perhaps? Genevieve?” 

“Ginny” (it could’ve been misspelled), “Virginia?” 

“If you gentlemen are looking for a good time—” Her 
grin, her red, maniacally good-morning-and-I-mean-good! 
grin, is wide enough to hold them both right, shivering, 
smiling, here, and she’s old enough to be their Mother— 
their joint Mother, combining the worst traits of Mrs. 
Perdoo and Mrs. Speed—in fact she is turning now into 
just that, even as they watch. These wrecked seas are full 
of temptresses—it’s watery and wanton out here all right. 
As the two gawking soft-boiled shamuses are drawn along 
into her aura, winking right here in the street, brassy with 
henna-glare, with passion-flowers on rayon—just before 
the last stumbling surrender into the lunacy of her purple 
eyes, they allow themselves, for the sinful tickle of it, a 
last thought of the project they’re supposed to be here 
on—Slothropian Episodic Zone, Weekly Historical Obser- 
vations (SEZ WHO)—a thought that comes running out in 
the guise of a clown, a vulgar, loose-ends clown be- 
spangled with wordless jokes about body juices, bald- 
headed, an amazing fall of nose-hair out both nostrils 
which he has put into braids and tied with acid-green 
bows—a scrabbling dash now out past sandbags and falling 
curtain, trying to get back his breath, to garble to them 
in a high unpleasant screech: “No Jenny. No Sally W. No 
Cybele, No Angela. No Catherine. No Lucy. No Gretchen. 
When are you going to see it? When are you going to 
see it?” 

No “Darlene” either. That came in yesterday. They 
traced the name as far as the residence of a Mrs. Quoad. 
But the flashy young divorcée never, she declared, even 


316 Graviry’s Ramnsow 


knew that English children were named “Darlene.” She 
was dreadfully sorry. Mrs. Quoad spent her days lounging 
about a rather pedicured, Mayfair address, and both in- 
vestigators felt relieved to be out of the neighborhood. . . . 

When are you going to see it? Pointsman sees it im- 
mediately. But he “sees” it in the way you would walking 
into your bedroom to be jumped on, out of a bit of penum- 
bra on your ceiling, by a gigantic moray eel, its teeth in 
full imbecile death-smile, breathing, in its fall onto your 
open face, a long human sound that you know, horribly, to 
be a sexual sigh.... 

That is to say, Pointsman avoids the matter—as re- 
flexively as he would any nightmare. Should this one turn 
out not to be a fantasy but real, well. :. 

“The data, so far, are incomplete.” This ought to be 
prominently stressed in all statements. “We admit that the 
early data seem to show,” remember, act sincere, “a num- 
ber of cases where the names on Slothrop’s map do not 
appear to have counterparts in the body of fact we've 
been able to establish along his time-line here in London. 
Establish so far, that is. These are mostly all first names, 
you see, the, the Xs without the Ys so to speak, ranks 
without files. Difficult to know how far into one ‘far 
enough’ really is. 

“And what if many—even if most—of the Slothropian 
stars are proved, some distant day, to refer to sexual fan- 
tasies instead of real events? This would hardly invalidate 
our approach, any more than it did young Sigmund 
Freud’s, back there in old Vienna, facing a similar viola- 
tion of probability—all those Papi-has-raped-me stories, 
which might have been lies evidentially, but were certainly 
the truth clinically. You must realize: we are concerned, 
at PISCES, with a rather strictly defined, clinical version 
of truth. We seek no wider agency in this.” 

So far, it is Pointsman’s burden alone. The solitude of a 
Fiihrer: he feels himself growing strong in the rays of this 
dark companion to his public star now on the rise... but 
he doesn’t want to share it, no not just yet. |.. 

Meetings of the staff, his staff, grow worse and worse 
than useless. They bog down into endless arguments about 
trivia—whether or not to rename PISCES! now that the 
Surrender has been Expedited, what sort of letterhead, if 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 317 


_ any, to adopt. The representative from Shell Mex House, 
Mr. Dennis Joint, wants to put the program under Special 
Projectiles Operations Group (SPOG), as an adjunct of the 
British rocket-scavenging effort, Operation Backfire, which 
is based out of Cuxhaven on the North Sea. Every other 

_ day brings a fresh attempt, from some quarter, to recon- 
stitute or even dissolve PISCES. Pointsman is finding it 
much easier of late to slip into a l’état c'est moi frame of 
mind—who else is doing anything? isn’t he holding it all 
together, often with nothing beyond his:own raw will...? 

Shell Mex House, naturally, is frantic about Slothrop’s 

_ disappearance. Here’s a man running loose who knows 
everything it’s possible to know—not only about the A4, 
but about what Great Britain knows about the A4. Ziirich 
teems with Soviet agents. What if they've already got 
Slothrop? They took Peenemiinde in the spring, it appears 
now they will be given the central rocket works at Nord- 
hausen, another of the dealings at Yalta.... At least three 

_ agencies, VIAM, TsAGI, and NISO, plus engineers work- 
ing out of other commissariats, are even now in Soviet- 
occupied Germany with lists of personnel and equipment 
to be taken east. Inside the SHAEF sphere of influence, 
American Army. Ordnance, and a host of competing re- 
search teams, are all busy collecting everything in sight. 
They've already rounded up von Braun and 500 others, 
and interned them at Garmisch, What if they get hold of 
Slothrop? 

There have also been, aggravating the Crisis, defections: 
Rollo Groast assumed back into the Society for Psychical 
Research, Treacle setting up a practice, Myron Grunton 
again a full-time wireless personality. Mexico has begun to 
grow distant. The Borgesius woman still performs her 

- nocturnal duties, but with the Brigadier ill now (has the 
old fool been forgetting his antibioticsP Must Pointsman 
do everything?) she’s beginning to fret. Of course Géza 
Rézsavélgyi is still with the project. A fanatic. Rézsavélgyi 

_ will never leave. 

__ So. A holiday by the sea. For political reasons, the party 
is made up of Pointsman, Mexico, Mexico's girl, Dennis 

_ Joint, and Katje Borgesius. Pointsman wears rope-soled 

shoes, his prewar bowler, and a rare smile. The weather is 

' not ideal. An overcast, a wind that will be chilly by mid- 


.. 
re 7 


Ora 


318 Graviry’s Rainsow 


afternoon. A smell of ozone blows up from the Dodgem 
cars out of the gray steel girderwork along the promenade, 
along with smells of shellfish on the barrows, and of salt 
sea. The pebbled beach is crowded with families: shoeless 
fathers in lounge suits and high white collars, mothers in 
blouses and skirts startled out of war-long camphor sleep, 
kids running all over in sunsuits, nappies, rompers, short 
pants, knee socks, Eton hats. There are ice cream, sweets, 
Cokes, cockles, oysters and shrimps with salt and sauce. 
The pinball machines writhe under the handling of fanati- 
cal servicemen and their girls, throwing body-english, 
cursing, groaning as the bright balls drum down the wood — 
obstacle courses through ka-chungs, flashing lights, thud- 
ding flippers. The donkeys hee-haw and shit, the children 
walk in it and their parents scream. Men sag in striped 
canvas chairs talking business, sports, sex, but most usually 
politics. An organ grinder plays Rossini’s overture to La 
Gazza Ladra (which, as we shall see later, in Berlin, marks 
a high point in music which everybody ignored, preferring 
Beethoven, who never got further than statements of in- 
tention), and here without snaredrums or the sonority of 
brasses the piece is mellow, full of hope, promising lay- 
ender twilights, stainless steel pavilions and everyone ele- 
vated at last to aristocracy, and love without payment of 
any kind.... 

It was Pointsman’s plan today not to talk shop, but to 
let the conversation flow more or less organically. Wait for 
others to betray themselves. But there is shyness, or con- 
straint, among them all. Talk is minimal. Dennis Joint is 
watching Katje with a horny smile, with now and then a 
Suspicious stare for Roger Mexico. Mexico meantime has 
his troubles with Jessica—more and more often these 
days—and at the moment the two aren’t even looking at 
each other. Katje Borgesius has her eyes far out to sea, 
and there is no telling what is going on with this one. In 
some dim way, Pointsman, though he can’t see that she 
has any leverage at all, is still afraid of her. There is still a 
lot he doesn’t know. Perhaps what’s bothering him most 
right now is her connection, if any, with Pirate Prentice. 
Prentice has been down to “The White Visitation” several 
times asking rather pointed questions about her. When 
PISCES recently opened its new branch office in London 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 319 


_ (which some wag, probably that young imbecile Webley 
Silvernail, has already dubbed “Twelfth House”) Prentice 
began hanging heavily around up there, romancing secre- 
taries, trying for a peep into this file or that.... What's 
up? What afterlife have the Firm found, this side of V-E 
Day? What does Prentice want... what’s his price? Is he 

in love with La Borgesius here? Is it possible for this 
woman to be in love? Love? Oh, it’s enough to make you 
scream. What would her idea of love be.... 

“Mexico,” grabbing the young statistician’s arm. 

“Eh?” Roger interrupted eying a lovely looks a bit like 
Rita Hayworth in a one-piece floral number with straps 
that X across her lean back... . 

“Mexico, I think I am hallucinating.” 

“Oh, really? You think you are? What are you seeing?” 

“Mexico, I see...I see... What do you mean, what 
am I seeing, you nit? It’s what I’m hearing.” 

“Well, what are you hearing, then.” A touch of peevish- 
ness to Roger now. 

“Right now I’m hearing you, saying, ‘What are you 
hearing, then.’ And I don’t like it!” 

“Why not.” 

“Because: unpleasant as this hallucination is, I find I still 
much prefer it to the sound of your voice.” 

Now this is odd behavior from anybody, but from 
usually correct Mr. Pointsman, it is enough to stop this 
mutually-paranoid party in their tracks. Nearby is a Wheel 
of Fortune, with Lucky Strike packs, kewpie dolls and 
candy bars stuffed among the spokes. 

“I say, what d’you think?” blond, hale-fellow Dennis 
Joint nudges Katje with an elbow as broad as a knee. In 
his profession he has learned to make instant evaluations 
of those with whom he deals. He judges old Katje here to 
be a jolly girl, out for a spot of fun. Yes, leadership mate- 
rial here, definitely. “Hasn’t he gone a bit mental sud- 
denly?” Trying to keep his voice down, grinning in athletic 
paranoia vaguely over in the peculiar Pavlovian’s direc- 
tion—not right at him you understand, eye contact might 
be suicidal folly given his state of mind.... 

Meantime, Jessica has gone into her Fay Wray number. 
This is a kind of protective paralysis, akin to your own 
response when the moray eel jumps you from the ceiling. 


4 F 


320 . Gravirty’s RaInBsow 


But this is for the Fist of the Ape, for the lights of electric 
New York white-waying into the room you thought was 
safe, could never be penetrated... for the coarse black 
hair, the tendons of need, of tragic love. ... 

“Yeah well,” as film critic Mitchell Prettyplace puts it 
in his definitive 18-volume study of King Kong, “you know, 
he did love her, folks.” Proceeding from this thesis, it ap- 
pears that Prettyplace has left nothing out, every shot in- 

cluding out-takes raked through for every last bit of sym- 
bolism, exhaustive biographies of everyone connected with 
the film, extras, grips, lab people... even interviews with 
King Kong Kultists, who to be eligible for membership 
must have seen the movie at least 100 times and be pre- 
pared to pass an 8-hour entrance exam.... And yet, and 
yet: there is Murphy’s Law to consider, that brash Irish 
proletarian restatement of Gédel’s Theorem—when every- 
thing has been taken care of, when nothing can go wrong, 
or even surprise us... something will, So the permuta- 
tions ’n’ combinations of Pudding’s Things That Can Hap- 
pen in European Politics for 1931, the year of Gédel’s 
Theorem, don’t give Hitler an outside chance. So, when 
laws of heredity are laid down, mutants will be born. 
Even as determinist a piece of hardware as the A4 rocket 
will begin spontaneously generating items like the “S-Ge- 
rat” Slothrop thinks he’s chasing like a grail. And so, too, 
the legend of the black scapeape we cast down like Luci- 
fer from the tallest erection in the world has come, in the 
fullness of time, to generate its own children, running 
around inside Germany even now—the Schwarzkommando, 
whom Mitchell Prettyplace, even, could not anticipate. 

At PISCES it is widely believed that the Schwarz- 
kommando have been summoned, in the way demons may 
be gathered in, called up to the light of day and earth by 
the now defunct Operation Black Wing. You can bet Psi 
Section was giggling about this for a: while. Who could 
have guessed there’d be real black rocket troops? That a 
story made up to scare last year’s enemy should prove to 
be literally true—and no way now to stuf them back in 
the bottle or even say the spell backward: no one ever 
knew the complete spell—different people |knew different 
parts of it, that’s what teamwork is.... By|the time it oc- 
curs to them to look back through the Most Secret docu- 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 321 


_ mentation surrounding Operation Black Wing, to try and 
get some idea of how this all might’ve happened, they 


will find, curiously, that certain critical documents are 
either missing or have been updated past the end of the 
Operation, and that it is impossible at this late date to re- 
construct the spell at all, though there will be the usual 
elegant and bad-poetic speculation. Even earlier specula- 
tion will be lopped and tranquilized. Nothing will remain, 
for example, of the tentative findings of Freudian Edwin 
Treacle and his lot, who toward the end even found them- 
selves at odds with their own minority, the psychoanalytic 
wing of Psi Section. It began as a search for some measur- 
able basis for the common experience of being haunted by 
the dead. After a while colleagues began to put in chits 
requesting they be transferred out. Unpleasantries such as 
“It’s beginning to sound like the Tavistock Institute around 


-here” began muttering up and down the basement halls. 


Palace revolts, many of them conceived in ornamentally 


_ splendid flashes of paranoia, brought locksmiths and weld- 


ers in by droves, led to mysterious shortages of office sup- 
plies, even of water and heat... none of which kept Trea- 
cle and lot from carrying on in a Freudian, not to mention 
Jungian frame of mind. Word of the Schwarzkommando’s 
real existence reached them a week before V-E Day. In- 


dividual events, who really said what to whom, have been 


lost in the frenzy of accusation, crying, nervous break- 
downs, and areas of bad taste that followed. Someone 
remembers Gavin Trefoil, face as blue as Krishna, running 
through the topiary trees stark naked, and Treacle chasing 

with an ax, screaming “Giant apeP Till show you a 
giant ape all right!” 

Indeed he would show the critter to many of us, though 
we would not look. In his innocence he saw no reason why 
co-workers on an office project should not practice self- 
criticism with the same rigor as revolutionary cells do. He 
had not meant to offend sensibilities, only to show the 
others, decent fellows all, that their feelings about black- 
ness were tied to feelings about shit, and feelings about 
shit to feelings about putrefaction and death. It seemed to 


him so clear... why wouldn’t they listen? Why wouldn’t 


they admit that their repressions had, in a sense that Eu- 
rope in the last weary stages of its perversion of magic has 


322 Gravity’s Rainsow 


lost, had incarnated real and living men, likely (according 
to the best intelligence) in possession of real and living 
weapons, as the dead father who never slept with you, 
Penelope, returns night after night to your bed, trying to 
snuggle in behind you...or as your unborn child wakes 
you, crying in the night and you feel its ghost-lips at your 
breast ... they are real, they are living, as you pretend to 
scream inside the Fist of the Ape... but looking over now 
at the much more likely candidate, cream-skinned Katje 
under the Wheel of Fortune, who is herself getting ready 
now to bolt down the beach and into the relative calm of 
the switch-back railway. Pointsman is hallucinating. He 
has lost control. Pointsman is supposed to have absolute 
control over Katje. Where does this leave her? In a control 
that is out of control. Not even back in the leather and 
pain of gemiitlich Captain Blicero’s world has she felt as 
terrified as now. 

Roger Mexico is taking it personally, oh-I-say, only try- 
ing to help.... 

What the somewhat disconnected Mr. Pointsman has 
been hearing all this time is a voice, strangely familiar, a 
voice he once imagined a face in a well-known new. 
photograph from the War to have: A 

“Here is what you have to do. You need Mexico now, 
more than ever. Your winter anxieties about the End of 
History seem now all well comforted to rest, part of your 
biography now like any old bad dream. But like Lord 
Acton always sez, History is not woven by innocent hands. 
Mexico's girl friend there is a threat to your whole enter- 
prise. He will do anything to hold on. Scowling and even 
cursing him she will nevertheless seduce him away, into 
a civilian fogbank in which you will lose him and never 
find him—not unless you act now, Pointsman. Operation 
Backfire is sending ATS girls out to the Zone now. Rocket 
girls: secretarial and even minor technical duties at the 
Cuxhaven test range. You have only to drop a word to 
SPOG, through Dennis Joint here, and Jessica Swanlake 
is out of your way. Mexico may complain for a while, but 
all the more reason for him, given the proper direction, to 
Lose Himself In His Work, eh? Remember the eloquent 
words of Sir Denis Nayland Smith to young Alan Sterling, 
whose fiancée is in the clutches of the insidious: yellow 


Bere 


i 
“yh 1 eee 
an) 


Un Perm’ au Casino Hermann Goering 323 


‘Adversary: ‘I have been through the sort of fires which 
are burning you now, Sterling, and I have always found 
that work was the best ointment for the burns.’ And we 
both know what Nayland Smith represents, mm? don’t 
we.” 

“I do,” sez Pointsman, aloud, “but I can’t really say that 
you do, can I, if I don’t even know who you are, you 
see.” 

This strange outburst does not reassure Pointsman’s com- 


panions. They begin to edge away, in definite alarm. “We — _ 


should find a doctor,” murmurs Dennis Joint, winking at 
Katje like a blond crewcut Groucho Marx. Jessica, for- 
getting her sulk, takes Roger’s arm. 

“You see, you see,” the voice starts up again, “she feels 
that she’s protecting him, against you. How many chances 
does one get to be a synthesis, Pointsman? East and West, 
together in the same bloke? You can not only be Nayland 
Smith, giving a young lad in a funk wholesome advice about 
the virtues of work, but you also, at the same time, get to 
be Fu Manchu! eh? the one who has the young lady in 
his power! How’s that? Protagonist and antagonist in one. 
Id jump at it, if I were you.” 

Pointsman is about to retort something like, “But you’re 
not me,” only he sees how the others all seem to be gog- 
gling at him. “Oh, ha, ha,” he sez instead. “Talking to 
myself, here. Little—sort of—eccentricity, heh, heh.” 

“Yang and Yin,” whispers the Voice, “Yang and Yin... .” 


tes, 


any 
mi 
ore 


* 
WN 
. 


O 


We are safely past the days of the Eis-Heiligen—St, Pan- 
cratius, St. Seryatius, St. Bonifacius, die kalte Sophie... 
they hover in clouds above the vineyards, holy beings of 
ice, ready with a breath, an intention, to ruin the year 

- with frost and cold. In certain years, especially War years, 
they are short on charity, peevish, smug in their power: 
not quite saintly or even Christian. The prayers of growers, 
pickers and wine enthusiasts must reach them, but there’s 
no telling how the ice-saints feel—coarse laughter, pagan 
annoyance, who understands this rear-guard who preserve 
winter against the revolutionaries of May? 

_. They found the countryside, this year, at peace by a 
scant few days. Already vines are beginning to grow back 
over dragon’s teeth, fallen Stukas, burned tanks. The sun 
warms the hillsides, the rivers fall bright as wine. The 
saints have refrained. Nights have been mild. The frost 
didn’t come. It is the spring of peace. The vintage, God 
granting at least a hundred days of sun, will be fine. 

Nordhausen puts less credence in the ice-saints than do 
wine regions farther south, but even here the season looks 
promising. Rain blows scattering out over the town as 
Slothrop comes in in the early morning, bare feet, blister- 
ing and reblistering, cooled here in the wet grass. There’s 
sunlight up on the mountains. His shoes got lifted by some 
DP with fingers lighter than dreams, on one of the many 
trains since’ the Swiss border, someplace rolling across 
Bavaria fast asleep. Whoever it was left a red tulip be- 
tween Slothrop’s toes. He has taken it for a sign. A re- 
minder of Katje. 

Signs will find him here in the Zone, and ancestors will 
reassert themselves. It’s like going to that Darkest Africa to 
study the natives there, and finding their quaint supersti- 
tions taking you over. In fact, funny thing, Slothrop just 
the other night ran into’an African, the first one he ever 
met in his life. Their discussion on top of the freight car 
in the moonlight lasted only a minute or two. Small talk 
for the sudden background departure of Major Duane 
Marvy over the side bounce-clatter down the cobbled fill 


327 


328 Gravity's Rainsow 


into the valley—well, certainly nothing was said then of 
any Herero beliefs about ancestors. Yet he feels his own, 
stronger now as borders fall away and the Zone enyelops 
him, his own WASPs in buckled black, who heard God 
clamoring to them in every tum of a leaf or cow loose 
among apple orchards in autumn.... 

Signs of Katje, and doubles too. One night he sat in a 
children’s play house on an abandoned estate, feeding a 
fire from the hair of a blonde doll with lapis lazuli eyes. 
He kept those eyes. A few days later he traded them for 
a ride and half a boiled potato, Dogs barked far away, 
summerwind blew in the birches. He was on one of the 
main arterials of the spring’s last dissolution and retreat. 
Somewhere nearby, one of Major-General Kammler’s 
rocket units had together found corporate death, leaving in 
their crippled military rage piecés, modules, airframe sec- 
tions, batteries rotting, paper secrets rained back into 
slurry. Slothrop follows. Any clue’s good enough to hop a 
train for.... 

The doll’s hair was human. The smell of it burning is 
horrible. Slothrop hears movement from the other side of 
the fire. A ratcheting noise—he grabs his blanket, ready to 
vault away out the empty window frame, expecting a 
grenade, Instead one of these little brightly painted Ger- 
man toys, an orangutan on wheels comes ki-ki-ki-ing into 
the firelight, spastic, head lolling, face in an idiot’s grin, 
steel knuckles scraping the floor. It rolls nearly into the 
fire before the clockwork runs down, the wagging head 
coming to dead center to stare at Slothrop. 

He feeds the fire another tuft of golden hair. “Evening.” 

Laughter, somewhere. A child, But old laughter. 

“Come on out, I’m harmless.” 

The ape is followed by a tiny black crow with a red 
beak, also on wheels, hopping, cawing, flapping metal 
wings. 

“Why are you burning my doll’s hair?” 

“Well, it’s not her own hair, you know.” 

“Father said it belonged to a Russian Jewess.” 

“Why don’t you come in to the fire?” | 

“Hurts my eyes.” Winding again. Nothing moves. But a 
_ music box begins to play. The tune is minor and precise. 
~ “Dance with me.” ; 


; 


In the Zone 329 


“I can’t see you.” 
“Here.” Out of the fire’s pale, a tiny frost-flower. He 


_ reaches and just manages to find her hand, to grasp her 


little waist. They begin their stately dance. He can’t even 


_ tell if he’s leading. 


He never saw her face. She felt like voile and organdy. 

“Nice dress.” 

“I wore it for my first communion.” The fire died pres- 
ently, leaving starlight and a faint glow over some town 
to the east, through windows whose panes were all gone. 
The music box still played, beyond the running time, it 
seemed, of an ordinary spring, Their feet moved over 
clouded, crumbled old glass, torn silks, bones of dead 
rabbits and kittens. The geometrical path took them among 
ballooning, ripped arrases, smelling of dust and an older 
bestiary than the one by the fire... unicorns, chimaeras 


_...and what had he seen festooning the child-sized en- 


tranceway? Garlic bulbs? Wait—weren’t they to keep 
away vampires? A faint smell reached him exactly then, an 
inbreaking of Balkan blood on the air of his north, as he 
turned back to her to ask if she really was Katje, the 
lovely little Queen of Transylvania. But the music had run 
down. She had vaporized from his arms, 

Well here he is skidded out onto the Zone like a plan- 
chette on a Ouija board, and what shows up inside the 
empty circle in his brain might string together into a mes- 
sage, might not, he'll just have to see. But he can feel a 
sensitive’s fingers, resting lightly but sure on his days, and 
he thinks of them as Katje’s. 

He’s still Ian Scuffling, war (peace?) correspondent, 


_ though back in British uniform these days, with plenty of 


time on these trains to hash over in his mind the informa- 
tion Mario Schweitar bootlegged for him back there in 
Ziirich. There is a fat file on Imipolex G, and it seems to 
point to Nordhausen. The engineer on the customer end 
of the Imipolex contract was one Franz Pékler. He came to 


_ Nordhausen in early 44, as the rocket was going into mass 


production. He was billeted in the Mittelwerke, an under- 
ground factory complex run largely by the SS. No word 
‘on where he went when the plant was evacuated in 
February and March. But Ian Scuffling, ace reporter, will 


_be sure to find a clue down in the Mittelwerke. | 


330 Gravity's Ramsow 


Slothrop sat in the swaying car with thirty other cold 
and tattered souls, eyes all pupil, lips cratered with sores, 
They were singing, some of them. A lot of them kids. It is 
a Displaced Person’s song, and Slothrop will hear it often 
around the Zone, in the encampments, out on the road, in 
a dozen variations: { 


If you see a train this evening, 
Far away against the sky, 

Lie down in your wooden : 
Sleep, and let the train go by. 


Trains that pass through empty cities, 
Trains that have no place to stay. 


locomotive, 
No one tends the staring light, — 
Trains have never needed riders, 
Trains belong to bitter night. _ 


Rights-of-way lie clear and cold: 
What we left them, trains inherit, 
Trains go on, and we grow old. \ 


Le their cries find only wind. 
Trains are meant for night and ruin. 
We are meant for song, and’sin. 


The Swiss firm’s dossier on L. (for Laszlo) Jamf listed 
all his assets at the time he came to work in Zirich. Ap- 


parently he had sat—as token scientist—on the board of 
directors of the Grdéssli Chemical ion as late as 
that back in Germany—pieces to be gatheted in over the 


next year or two by the octopus IG—was the record of a 


In the Zone 331 
transaction between Jamf and Mr. Lyle Bland, of Boston, 


_ Massachusetts. 


On the beam, Jackson. Lyle Bland is a name he knows, 


all right. And a name that also shows up often in the 


private records Jamf kept of his own business deals, Seems 


_ that Bland, during the early twenties, was heavily involved 
with the Hugo Stinnes operation in Germany. Stinnes, 


while he lasted, was the Wunderkind of European finance. 
Based out of the Ruhr, where his family had been coal 
barons for generations, young Stinnes built up a good- 
sized empire of steel, gas, electric and water power, street- 
cars and barge lines before he was 30. During the World 


‘War he worked closely with Walter Rathenau, who was - 


ramrodding the whole economy then. After the war 
Stinnes managed to put the horizontal electrical trust of 


_ Siemens-Schuchert together with the coal and iron sup- 


plies of the Rheinelbe Union into a super-cartel that was 
both horizontal and vertical, and to buy into just about 
everything else—shipyards, steamship lines, hotels, restau- 
rants, forests, pulp mills, newspapers—meantime also 


_ speculating in currency, buying foreign money with marks 


borrowed from the Reichsbank, driving the mark down and 
then paying off the loans at a fraction of the original 
figure. More than any one financier he was blamed for the 
Inflation. Those were the days when you carried marks 
around in wheelbarrows to your daily shopping and used 
them for toilet paper, assuming you had anything to shit. 
Stinnes’s foreign connections went all over the world— 


Brazil, the East Indies, the United States—businessmen 


; 


like Lyle Bland found his growth rate irresistible. The 
theory going around at the time was that Stinnes was con- 
spiring with Krupp, Thyssen, and others to ruin the mark 


and so get Germany out of paying her war debts. 


Bland’s connection was vague. Jamf’s records mention 
that he had negotiated contracts for supplying tons of 
private currency known as Notgeld to Stinnes and col- 
leagues, as well as “Mefo bills” to the Weimar Republic— 
another of Hjalmar Schacht’s many bookkeeping dodges 
to keep official records clear of any hint of weapons pro- 
curement banned under the terms of Versailles. Some of 
‘these banknote contracts were let to a certain Massa- 


332 Gravity's: RAINBOW 


chusetts paper mill, on whose board Lyle Bland happenec 
to sit. 

The name of this contractor was the Slothrop Pape 
Company. 

He reads his name without that iad surprise. It be 
longs here, as do the most minor details during déjA vu 
Instead of any sudden incidence of light (even in th 
shape of a human being: golden and monitory light), as h 
stares at these eight ink marks, there passes a disagreeabl 
stomach episode, a dread tangible as vomit beginning t 
assert itself—the same vertigo that overtook him one da‘ 
long ago in the Himmler-Spielsaal. A gasbag surrounds hi 
head, rubbery, vast, pushing in from all sides, that feelin; 
we know, yes, but... He is also getting a hardon, for n 
immediate reason, And there’s that smell again, a smel 
from before his conscious memory begins, a soft ant 
chemical smell, threatening, haunting, not a smell to b 
found out in the world—it is the breath of the Forbidder 
Wing...essence of all the still figures waiting for hin 
inside, daring him to enter and find a secret he canno 
survive. 

Once something was done to him, in a room, while he 
lay helpless. . 

His erection ‘home from a certain distance, like an in 
strument installed, wired by Them into his body as : 
colonial outpost here in our raw and clamorous world 
another office representing Their white Metropolis fa: 
away. . 

A sad. story, all right. Slothrop, very nervous by now 
reads on. Lyle Bland, ehP Well, sure, that fits. He cai 
recall dimly once or twice having seen Uncle Lyle. Th 
man used to come to visit his father, affable, fair-haired, : 
hustler in the regional Jim Fisk style, Bland was alway 
picking young Tyrone up and swinging him around by hi 
feet. That was O.K.—Slothrop had no special commitmen 
at the time to right side up. 

From what it sez here, Bland either saw the Stinne 
crash coming before most of its other victims, or was jus 

naturally nervous. Early in ’23 he began to sell off hi 
interests in the Stinnes operations. One of these sales wa 
made through Laszlo Jamf to the Grés$li Chemical Cor 
poration (later Psychochemie AG). One of the assets trans 


_ In the Zone 3 333 


ferred in this sale was “all interest in Schwarzknabe enter- 
prise. Seller agrees to continue surveillance duties: until 
such time: as Schwindel operative can be relieved by pur- 
chaser equivalent, acceptability to be determined by 
seller.” : 

__ Jamf’s codebook happens to be in the dossier, Part of 
\the man’s personality structure, after all. “Schwindel” was 
his code name for Hugo Stinnes. Clever sense of humor, 
the old fart. Across from “Schwarzknabe,” now, are the 
initials “T.S.” 

Well, holy cow, Slothrop reckons, that must be me, huh. 
Barring the outside possibility of Tough Shit. 
Listed. as a “Schwarzknabe” liability is the unpaid re- 
mainder of a bill to Harvard University, about $5000 
worth including the interest, “as per agreement. (oral) 

_ with Schwarzvater.” 

“Schwarzvater” is the code for “B.S.” Which, barring 
the outside possibility of Bull Shit, seems to be Slothrop’s 

_ own father, Broderick. Blackfather Slothrop. 

_ Nice way to find out your father made a deal 20 years 
ago with somebody to spring for your education. Come to 
think of it, Slothrop never could quite put the announce- 
‘ments, all through the Depression, of imminent family 
ruin, together with the comfort he enjoyed at Harvard. 
Well, now, what was the deal between his father’ and 
Bland? I’ve been sold, Jesus Christ I’ve been sold to IG 
Farben like a side of beef. Surveillance? Stinnes, like every 
industrial emperor, had his own company spy system. So 
did the IG. Does this mean Slothrop has been under their 

_ observation—m-maybe since he was born? Yaahhh... 

'_ The fear balloons again inside his brain. It will not be 
kept down with a simple Fuck You.... A smell, a forbid- 

_den room, at the bottom edge of his memory. He can’t 
See it, can’t make it out. Doesn’t want to. It is allied with 
the Worst Thing. 

He knows what the smell has to be: though according 
_to these papers it would have been too early for it, though 
he has never come across any of the stuff among the day- 
time coordinates of his life, still, down here, back here in 
the warm dark, among early shapes where the clocks and 
calendars don’t mean too much, he knows that what’s 
_ haunting him now will prove to be the smell of Imipolex G. 


S 
: 


334 Gravity’s Rainsow 


Then there’s this recent dream he is afraid of having 
again. He was in his old room, back home. A summer 
afternoon of lilacs and bees, and warm air through an 
open window. Slothrop had found a very old dictionary of 
technical German. It fell open to a certain page prickling 
with black-face type. Reading down the page, he would 
come to JAMF. The definition would read: I.. He woke 
begging It no—but even after waking, he was sure, he 
would remain sure, that It could visit him again, any 
time It wanted. Perhaps you know that dream too, Per- 
haps It has warned you never to speak Its name, If so, you 
know about how Slothrop'll be feeling now. 

What he does is lurch to his feet, over to the door of 
the freight car, which is going up a grade. He drags open 
the door, slips out—action, action—and mounts a ladder 
to the roof. A foot from his face, this double row of shiny 
bright teeth hangs in the air, Just what he needs. It is 
Major Marvy of U.S. Army Ordnance, leader of Marvy’s 
Mothers, the meanest-ass_ technical intelligence team in 
this whole fuckin’ Zone, mister, Slothrop can call him 
Duane, if he wants. “Boogie, boogie, boogie! Catch all ’em 
jungle bunnies back ’ere in ’at next car! Sheee-dol” 

“Wait a minute,” sez Slothrop, “I think I’ve been asleep 
or something.” His feet are cold. This Marvy is really fat. 
Pants bloused into shiny combat boots, roll of fat hanging 
over a web belt where he keeps his sunglasses and 455 
hornrims, hair slicked back, eyes like safety valves that 
pop out at you whenever—as now—the pressure in his 
head gets too high. 

Marvy hitched a lift on a P-47 from Paris far as Kassel, 
got coupled onto this train here west of Heiligenstadt. He’s 
headed for the Mittelwerke, like Ian Sceuffling. Needs to 
coordinate with some Project Hermes people from Gen- 
eral Electric. Sure makes him nervous, those niggers next 
door, “Hey, ought to be a good story for you people. Warn 
the folks back home.” 

“Are they GIs?” 

“Shit no. Kraut. South-West African. Something. You 
mean you don’t know about that? Come on. Aw. Limey 
intelligence sure ain’t too intelligent, hahah, no offense 
understand. I thought the whole world knew.” Follows a 
lurid tale—which sounds like something SHAEF made up, 


In the Zone - 335 


' Goebbels’s less than giddy imagination reaching no further 
than Alpine Redoubts and such—of Hitler’s scheme for 
setting up a Nazi empire in black Africa, which fell 
through after Old Blood ’n’ Guts handed Rommel’s ass to 
_him in the desert. ““Here’s yer ass, General.’ ‘Ach du 
_-lieber! Mein Arsch! YAH—hahaha...’” clutching comi- 
‘eally at the seat of his own large trousers. Well, the black 
cadres had no more future in Africa, stayed on in Ger- 
many as governments-in-exile without even official recog- 
nition, drifted somehow into the ordnance branch of the 
German Army, and pretty soon learned how to be rocket 
technicians. Now they were just running loose. Wild. 

’ Haven’t been interned as P/Ws, far as Marvy knows they 
haven’t even been disarmed. “Not enough we have to 
worry about Russkys, frogs, limeys—hey, beg pardon, 
buddy. Now we got not just niggers you see, but kraut 
niggers. Well, Jesus. V-E Day just about everyplace you 

, had a rocket, you had you a nigger. Never any all-boogie 
_ batteries, understand. Even the krauts couldn’t be that 
daffy! One battery, that’s 81 men, plus all your support, 
your launch-control, power, propellants, your surveying— 
champ, that'd sure be one heap o’ niggers all in one place. 
But are they still all scattered out, like they were? You 
find out, you got you a scoop, friend. Cause if they're 
gettin’ together now, oh dat’s bi-i-i-g trouble! There’s at 
least two dozen in that car—right down there, look. A-and 
they’re headin’ for Nordhausen, pall” a fat finger-poke in 
the chest with each word, “hah? Whatcha think they have 
in mind? You know what I think? They have a plan. Yeah. 

, I think it’s rockets. Don’t ask me how, it’s just something I 
| feel here, in m’heart. A-and you know, that’s awful dan- 

gerous. You can’t trust them— With rockets? They're a 

’ childlike race. Brains are smaller.” 

_“But our patience,” suggests a calm voice now out of 
the darkness, “our patience is enormous, though perhaps 
hot unlimited.” So saying, a tall African with a full im- 
perial beard steps up grabs the fat American, who has 
time to utter one short yell before being flung bodily over 
the side. Slothrop and the African watch the Major bounce 

down the embankment behind them, arms and legs flying, 
out of sight. Firs crowd the hills. A crescent moon has 
_Tisen over one ragged crest... 


Ly. 
er ad 


— 


336 Gravity's Rainsow 


The man introduces himself in English, as Oberst En- 
zian, of the Schwarzkommando. He apologizes for his show 
of temper, notes Slothrop’s armband, declines an inter- 
view before Slothrop can get in a word. “There’s no story. 
We're DPs, like everybody else.” 

“The Major seemed worried that you’re headed for 
Nordhausen.” 

“Marvy is going to be an annoyance, I can tell. Still, he 
doesn’t pose as much of a problem as—” He peers at 
Slothrop. “Hmm. Are you hi ak a war correspondent?” 

“Ni oO. ” 

“A free agent, I’d guess.” 

“Don't know about that ‘free,’ Oberst.” 

“But you are free. We all are. You'll see. Before long.” 
He steps away down the spine of the freighttop, waving 
a beckoning German good-by. “Before long. . 

Slothrop sits on the rooftop, rubbing his bare feet. A 
friend? A good omen? ‘Black rocket troops? What bizarre 
shit? 


Well good mornin’ gang, let’s start it © 

Off with a bang, so long to : 

Double-u Double-u Two-o-o-ol 

Now the fightin’s over and we're all in clover 

And I'm here ta bring sunshine to you— ' 

Hey there Herman the German, stop yer fussin’ 
and squirmin’, i 

Don’tcha know you're goin’ home ta stay— 

No, there’s never a frown, here in Rocket, 

Sock-it T own, 

Where ev'ry day’s a beautiful day— 

(Quit kvetchin’, Gretchen! ) 

Go on and have’ a beautiful daa-aay! 


Nordhausen in the morning: the ies is a green salad, 
crisp with raindrops. Everything is’ fresh, washed. The 
Harz hump up all around, dark slopes bearded to the tops 
with spruce, fir and larch. High-gabled houses; sheets of 
water reflecting the sky, muddy streets, American and 
Russian GIs pouring in and out of the doots of'the. taverns 
and makeshift PXs, everybody packing a \sidearm. Mead- 
ows and logged-off wedges up on the mountainsides flow 
with mottled light as rainclouds blow away over Thuringia. 


In the Tone 337 


_ Castles perch high over the town, sailing in and out of 
torn clouds. Old horses with smudged knobby knees, short- 
legged and big-chested, pull wagonloads of barrels, necks 
straining at twin collars chained together, heavy horse- 
shoes sending mudflowers at each wet clop, down from 
the vineyards to the taverns. 

Slothrop wanders into a roofless part of town. Old peo- 
ple in black are bat-flittering among the walls. Shops and 
dwellings here are all long-looted by the slave laborers 
liberated from the Dora camp. Lotta those fags still 
around, with baskets and 175 badges out on display, star- 
ing moistly from doorways. From the glassless bay win- 
dow of a dress shop, in the dimness behind a plaster 
dummy lying bald and sprawled, arms raised to sky, hands 
curved for bouquets or cocktail glasses they'll never hold 
again, Slothrop hears a girl singing. Accompanying herself 
on a balalaika. One of those sad little Parisian-sounding 
tunes ‘in 3/4: 


Love never goes away, 
Never completely dies, 
Always some souvenir 
Takes us by sad surprise. 


You went away from me, 
One rose.was left behind— 
Pressed in my Book of Hours, 
That is the rose I find.... 


Though it’s another year, 
Though it’s another me, 

Under the rose is a drying tear, 
Under my linden tree. ... 


Love never goes away, 

Not if it’s really true, 

It can return, by night, by day, 

Tender and green and new 

As the leaves from a linden tree, love, 
that I left with you. 


Her name turns out to be Geli Tripping, and the bala- 
_laika belongs to a Soviet intelligence officer named Tchi- 
_ tcherine. In a way, Geli does too—part-time, anyhow. 


338 | Gravity’s RAINBOW 


Seems this Tchitcherine maintains a harem, a girl in every 
rocket-town in the Zone. Yup, another rocket maniac. Slo- 
throp feels like a tourist. 

Geli talks about her young man. They sit in her roofless 
room drinking a pale wine known hereabouts as Nord- 
hauser Schattensaft. Overhead, black birds with yellow 
beaks lace the sky, looping in the sunlight from their 
nests up in the mountain castles and down in the city 
ruins. Far away, perhaps in the marketplace, a truck con- 
voy is idling all its engines, the smell of exhaust washing 
over the maze of walls, where moss creeps, water oozes, 
roaches seek purchase, walls that baffle the motor sound 
so that it seems to come in from all directions. 

She’s thin, a bit awkward, very young. Nowhere in her 
eyes is there any sign of corrosion—she might have spent 
all her War roofed and secure, tranquil, playing with small 
forest animals in a rear area someplace. Her song, she 
admits, sighing, is mostly wishful thinking. “When he’s 
away, he’s away. When you came in I almost thought you 
were Tchitcherine.” 

“Nope. Just a hard-working newshound, is all. No rock- 
ets, no harems.” 

“It’s an arrangement,” she tells him. “It’s so unorga- 
nized out here. There have to be arrangements, You'll find 
out.” Indeed he will—he'll find thousands of arrange- 
ments, for warmth, love, food, simple movement along 
roads, tracks and canals. Even G-5, living its fantasy of 
being the only government in Germany now, is just the 
arrangement for being victorious, is all. No more or less‘ 
real than all these others so private, silent, and lost to 
History. Slothrop, though he doesn’t know it yet, is as 
properly constituted a state as any other in the Zone these 
days. Not paranoia. Just how it is. Temporary alliances, 
knit and undone. He and Geli reach their arrangement 
hidden from the occupied streets by remnants of walls, in 
an old fourposter bed facing a dark pier glass. Out the 
roof that isn’t there he can see a long tree-covered moun- 
tain ascending. Wine or her breath, nests of down in the 
hollows of her arms, thighs with the on of saplings in 
wind. He’s barely inside her before she cdmes, a fantasy 
about Tchitcherine in progress, clear and_touchingly, 
across her facé. This irritates Slothrop, but doesn’t keep 
him from coming himself. £ 


_ In the Zone ; 339 


The foolishness begins immediately on detumescence, — 
_ amusing questions like, what kind of word has gone out to 
keep everybody away from Geli but me? Or, is it that 
something about me reminds her of Tchitcherine, and if 
so, what? And, say, where’s that Tchitcherine right now? 
He dozes off, is roused by her lips, fingers, dewy legs 
sliding along his. The. sun jumps across their section of 
sky, gets eclipsed by a breast, is reflected out of her child’s 
eyes... then clouds, rain for which she puts up a green 
tarp with tassels she’s sewn. on, canopy style... rain 
sluices down off the tassels, cold and loud, Night. She 
feeds him boiled cabbage with an old heirloom of a spoon 
with a crest on it. They drink more of that wine. Shadows 
are soft verdigris. The rain has stopped. Somewhere kids 
go booting an empty gas can over the cobblestones. 

Something comes flapping in out of the sky: talons 
scrabble along the top of the canopy. “What’s that?” half 
awake and she’s got the covers again, c’mon Geli... . 

“My owl,” sez Geli. “Wernher. There’s a candy. bar in 
the top drawer of the chiffonier, Liebchen, would you 
mind feeding him?” 

_Liebchen indeed. Staggering off the bed, vertical for 
the first time all day, Slothrop removes a Baby Ruth from 
its wrapper, clears his throat, decides not to ask her how 
she came by it because he knows, and lobs the thing up on 
the canopy for that Wernher. Soon, lying together again, 
they hear peanuts crunching, and a clacking beak.’ 

“Candy bars,” Slothrop grouches, “What’s the matter 
with him? Don’t you know he’s supposed to be out forag- 
ing, for live mice or some shit? You've turned him into a _ 
house owl.” . 

“You're pretty lazy yourself.” Baby fingers creeping 
down along his ribs. 

“Well—I bet—cut it out—I bet that Tchitcherine 
doesn’t have to get up and feed that owl.” 

She cools, the hand stopping where it is. “He loves 
Tchitcherine. He never comes to be fed, unless Tchi- 
tcherine’s here.” _ 

Slothrop’s turn to cool. More correctly, freeze. “Uh, but, 
you don’t: mean that Tchitcherine is actually, uh...” 

“He was supposed to be,” sighing, 

“Oh. When?” i 

“This morning. He’s late. It happens.” 


" 3 


r 


340 - Gravitry’s Rarnsow 


Slothrop’s off the bed halfway across the room with a 
softoff, one sock on and the other in his teeth, head 
through one armhole of his undershirt, fly zipper jammed, 
yelling shit. 

“My brave Englishman,” she drawls. 

“Why didn’t you bring this up earlier, Geli, huh?” 

“Oh, come back. It’s nighttime, he’s with a woman 
someplace. He can’t sleep alone.” 

“I hope you can.” 

“Hush. Come here. You can’t go out with nothing on 
your feet. I'll give you’ a pair of his old boots and tell you 
all his secrets.” 

“Secrets?” Look out, Slothrop. “Why should I want to 
know—” 

“You're not a war correspondent.” 

“Why does everybody keep saying that? Nobody be- 
lieves me. Of course I’m a war correspondent.” Shaking 
the brassard at her. “Can’t you read? Sez ‘War Corre- 
spondent.’ I even have a mustache, here, don’t IP Just 
like that Emest Hemingway.” 

“Oh. Then I imagine you wouldn’t be looking for 
Rocket Number oooo0 after all. It was just a silly idea I 
had. I’m sorry.” 

Oh boy, am I gonna get out of here, sez Slothrop' to 
himself, this is a badger game if I ever saw one, man. 
Who else would be interested in the one rocket out of 
6000 that carried the Imipolex G device? 

“And you couldn’t care less about the Schwarzgerit, 
either,” she keeps on. She keeps on. 

“The what?” 

“They also called it S-Gerit.” 

Next higher assembly, Slothrop, remember? Wernher, 
up on the canopy, is hooting. A signal to that Tchitcherine, 
no doubt. : 

Paranoids are not paranoids (Proverb 5) because they’re 
paranoid, but because they keep putting themselves, fuck- 
ing idiots, deliberately into paranoid situations. 

“Now how on earth,” elaborately uncorking a fresh bot- 
tle of Nordhauser Schattensaft, thoppp, best Cary Grant 
imitation he can summon up with bowels 6 echoing tight, © 
suavely refilling glasses, handing one to/}her, “would a 
sweet, young, thing, like you, know anything, about 
rocket, hahd-weah?” a 


In the Zone ; 341 


“T read Vaslay’s mail,” as if it’s a dumb question, which 


it is. 


-“You shouldn’t be blabbing to random strangers like 


. this. If he finds out, he’ll murder you.” 


“T like you. I like intrigue. I like playing.” 
“Maybe you like to get people in trouble.” 

“All right.” Out with the lower lip. 

“O.K., O.K., tell me about it. But I don’t know if the 
Guardian will even be interested. My editors are a rather 
stuffy lot, you know.” ; 

Goose bumps crowd her bare little breasts. “I posed 
once for a rocket insignia. Perhaps you've seen it. A pretty 
young witch straddling an A4. Carrying her obsolete broom 
over her shoulder. I was voted the Sweetheart of 3/Art. 


Abt. (mot) 485.” 


“Are you a real witch?” . 

“I think I have tendencies. Have you been up to the 
Brocken yet?” 

“Just hit town, actually.” 

“Tve been up there every Walpurgisnacht since I had 
my first period. I'll take you, if you like.” 

“Tell me about this, this ‘Schwarzgerit.’” 

“T thought you weren’t interested.” 

“How can I know if I’m interested or not if I don’t even 
know what I’m supposed or not supposed to be interested 
in?” 

“You must be a correspondent. You have a way with 
words.” 

Tchitcherine comes roaring through the Sides a 
Nagant blazing in his fist. Tchitcherine lands in a para- 


‘chute and fells Slothrop with one judo chop. Tchitcherine 


N 


drives a Stalin tank right into the room, and blasts Slo- 
throp with a 76 mm shell. Thanks for stalling him, Lieb- 


~ chen, he was a spy, well, cheerio, I’m off to Peenemiinde 


and a nubile Polish wench with tits like vanilla ice cream, 
check you out later. 
“T have to go, I think,” Slothrop sez, Sey nbuRaEE needs 
a new ribbon, gotta sharpen pencils, you know how it is—” 
“I told you, he won’t be here tonight.” 
“Why? Is he out after that Schwarzgerit, eh?” 
-- “No. He hasn’t heard the latest. The message came in 


from Stettin yesterday.” 


“In clear, of course.” 


342 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


“Why not?” 

“Couldn’t be very important.” 

“It’s for sale.” 

“The messager” 

“The S-Gerit, you pill. A man in Swinemiinde can get 
it. Half a million Swiss francs, if youre in the market. He 
waits on the Strand-Promenade, every day till noon. He'll 
be wearing a white suit.” 

Oh yeah? “Blodgett Waxwing.” 

“It didn’t give the name. But I don’t think it’s Waxwing. 
He sticks close to the Mediterranean.” 

“You get around.” 

“Waxwing is already a legend around the Zone. So is 
Tchitcherine. For all I know, so are you. What was your 
name?” 

“Cary Grant. Ge-li, Ge-li, Ge-li. ... Listen, Swinemiinde, 
that’s in that Soviet zone, ain’t it.” 

“You sound like a German. Forget frontiers now. Forget 
subdivisions. There aren’t any.” 

“There are soldiers.” 

“That’s right.” Staring at him. “But that’s different.” 

“Oh.” 

“You'll learn. It’s all been suspended. Vaslay calls it an 
‘interregnum.’ You only have to flow along with it.” 

“Gonna flow outa here now, kid. Thanx for the info, and 
a tip of the Scuffling hat to ya—” 

“Please stay.” Curled on the bed, her eyes about to spill 
over with tears. Aw, shit, Slothrop you sucker... but she’s 
just a little kid. . “Come here. . 

The minute he puts it in, though, she goes wicked and 
a little crazy, slashing at his legs, shoulders, and ass with 
chewed-down fingernails sharp. as a saw. Considerate 
Slothrop is trying to hold off coming till she’s ready when 
all of a sudden something heavy, feathered, and many- 
pointed comes crashing down onto the small of his back, 
bounces off triggering him and as it turns out Geli too 
ZONNGGGI. eeeece...oh, gee whiz. Wings flap and 
Wemher—for it is he—ascends into the darkness. 

“Fucking bird,” Slothrop screams, “he! tries that again 
rl give him a Baby Ruth right up his ass, boy—” it’s a 
plot it’s a plot it’s Pavlovian conditionin ! or something, 
“Tchitcherine trained him to do that, Ps. F 

s 
x 


In the Zone. 343 


“Wrong! I trained him to do that.” She’s smiling at him 
so four-year-old happy and not holding a thing back, that 
Slothrop decides to believe everything she’s been telling 
him. 

“You are a witch.” Paranoid that he is, he snuggles 
down under the counterpane with the long-legged sorcer- 
ess, lights a cigarette, and despite endless Tchitcherines 
vaulting in over the roofless walls with arsenals of disaster 
all for him, even falls asleep, presently, in her bare and 
open arms. 


oO 


It’s a Sunday-funnies dawn, very blue sky with gaudy 
pink clouds in it. Mud across the cobblestones is so slick 
it reflects light, so that you walk not streets but these long 
streaky cuts of raw meat, hock of werewolf, gammon of 
Beast. Tchitcherine has big feet, Geli had to stuff pieces 
of an old chemise in the toes of his boots so they'd fit 
Slothrop. Dodging constantly for jeeps, ten-ton lorries, 
‘Russians on horseback, he finally hitches a ride from an 
18-year-old American first lieutenant in a gray Mercedes 
staff car with dents all over it. Slothrop frisks mustaches, 
flashes his armband, feeling defensive. The sun’s already 
warm. There’s a smell of evergreens on the mountains. 
This rail driving, who’s attached to the tank company 
guarding the Mittelwerke, doesn’t think Slothrop should 
have any trouble getting inside. English SPOG have 
come and gone. Right now American Army Ordnance 
people are busy crating and shipping out parts and tools 
for a hundred Ags. A big hassle. “Trying to get it all 
out before the Russians come to take over.” Interregnum. 
Civilians and bureaucrats show up every day, high-level 
tourists, to stare and go wow. “Guess nobody’s seen em 
this big before. I don’t know what it is. Like a burlesque 
crowd. Not gonna do anything, just here to look. Most 
of them bring cameras. Notice you didn’t. We have them 
for rent at the main gate, if you're interested.” 

One of many hustles. Yellow James the cook has got 
him a swell little sandwich wagon, you can hear him in 
the tunnels calling, “Come an’ get ’em! Hot ’n’ cold and 


\s\ 


344 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


drippin’ with greens!” And there'll be grease on the glasses 
of half these gobbling fools in another five minutes. Nick 
De Profundis, the company lounge lizard, has surprised 
everybody by changing, inside the phone booth of factory 
spaces here, to an energetic businessman, selling A4 sou- 
venirs: small items that can be worked into keychains, 
money clips or a scatter-pin for that special gal back 
home, burner cups of brass off the combustion chambers, 
ball bearings from the servos, and this week the hep item 
seems to be SA 100 acorn diodes, cute little mixing valves 
looted out of the Telefunken units, and the even rarer SA 
102s, which of course fetch a higher price. And there’s 
“Micro” Graham, who’s let his sideburns grow and lurks 
in the Stollen where the gullible visitors stray: “Pssst.” 

“Pssst?” 

“Forget it.” 

“Well now you’ve got me curious.” 

“Thought you looked like a sport. You taking the tour?” 

“T-I only stepped away for a second. Really, ’'m going 
right back... .” 

“Finding it a little dull?” Oily Micro moves in on his 
mark. “Ever wonder to yourself: “What really went on in 
here?’P” 

The visitor who is willing to spend extravagant sums is 
rarely disappointed. Micro knows the secret doors to rock 
passages that lead through to Dora, the prison camp next 
to the Mittelwerke. Each member of the party is given 
his own electric lantern. There is hurried, basic instruction 
on what to do in case of any encounter with the dead. 
“Remember they were always on the defensive here. 
When the Americans liberated Dora, the prisoners who 
were still alive went on a rampage after the material— 
they looted, they ate and drank themselves sick. For 
others, Death came like the American Army, and liberated” 
them spiritually. So theyre apt to be on a spiritual ram-_ 
page now. Guard your thoughts. Use the natural balance - 
of your mind against them. They'll be coming at you off- 
balance, remember.” ati ‘ 

A popular attraction is the elegant Raumwaffe space- 
suit wardrobe, designed by famous military couturier 
Heini of Berlin. Not only are there by nous dazzling 
enough to thrill even the juvenile leads of a space-— 


oa 


r 


ae} 


& 


ae 


In the Zone — 345 


operetta, down to the oddly-colored television images 
flickering across their toenails, but Heini has even thought 
of silks for the amusing little Space-Jockeys (Raum- 
Jockeier) with their electric whips, who will someday 
zoom about just outside the barrier-glow of the Raketen- 
Stadt, astride “horses” of polished meteorite all with the 
same stylized face (a high-contrast imago of the horse 
that follows you, emphasis on its demented eyes, its teeth, 
the darkness under its hindquarters ... .), with the pro- 
pulsive gases blowing like farts out their tail ends—the 
juvenile leads giggle together at this naughty bathroom 
moment, and slowly, in what’s hardly more than a sigh 
of gravity here; go bobbing, each radiant in a display of 
fluorescent plastics, back in to the Waltz, the strangely 
communal Waltz of the Future, a slightly, disquietingly 
grainy-dissonant chorale implied here in the whirling 
silence of faces, the bare shoulderblades slung so space- 
Viennese; so jaded with Tomorrow. .. .. 

- Then come—the Space Helmets! At first you may be 
alarmed, on noticing that they appear to be fashioned 
from skulls. At least the upper dome of this unpleasant 
headgear ‘is certainly the skull of some manlike creature 
built to a larger scale. . ... Perhaps Titans lived under this 
‘mountain, and their skulls got harvested like giant mush- 
rooms. . . . The eye-sockets are fitted with quartz lenses. 
Filters may be slipped in. Nasal bone and upper teeth 
have been replaced by a metal breathing apparatus, full 
‘of slots and grating. Corresponding to the jaw is a built-up 
section, almost a facial codpiece, of iron. and ebonite, 
perhaps housing a radio unit, thrusting forward in black 
fatality. For an extra few marks you are allowed to slip 
one of these helmets on. Once inside these yellow caverns, 
looking out now through neutral-density orbits, the sound 
of your breath hissing up and around the bone spaces, 
what you thought was a balanced mind is little help. The 
compartment the Schwarzkommando were quartered in 
is no longer an amusing travelogue of native’ savages 
taking on ways of the 2ist century. The milk calabashes 
appear only to be made from some plastic. On the spot 
where tradition sez Enzian had his Illumination, in the 
course of a wet dream where he coupled with a slender 
white rocket, there is the dark stain, miraculously still 


346 Graviry’s RaInsow 


wet, and a smell you understand is meant to be that of 
semen—but it is really closer to soap, or bleach. The wall- 
paintings lose their intended primitive crudeness and take 
on primitive spatiality, depth and brilliance—transform, 
indeed, to dioramas on the theme “The Promise of Space 
Travel.” Lit sharply by carbide light which hisses and 
smells like the bad breath of someone quite familiar to 
you, the view commands your stare, After a few minutes 
it becomes possible to make out actual movement down 
there, even at the immense distances implied by the scale: 
yes, we're hanging now down the last limb of our tra- 
jectory in to the Raketen-Stadt, a difficult night of mag- 
netic storm behind us, eddy currents still shimmering 
through all our steel like raindrops that cling to vehicle 
windows . . . yes, it is a City: vegetable “Ho-ly!”s and 
“Isn’t that something!”s go away echoing as we crowd 
about the bloom of window in this salt underground. . . . 
Strangely, these are not the symmetries we were pro- 
grammed to expect, not the fins, the streamlined corners, 
pylons, or simple solid geometries of the official vision at 
all—that’s for the ribbon clerks back on the Tour, in the 
numbered Stollen. No, this Rocket-City, so whitely lit 
against the calm dimness of space, is set up deliberately 
To Avoid Symmetry, Allow Complexity, Introduce Tetror 
(from the Preamble to the Articles of Immachination )— 
but tourists have to connect the look“of it back to things 
they remember from their times and planet—back to the 
wine bottle smashed in the basin, the bristlecone pines 
outracing Death for millennia, concrete roads abandoned 
year ago, hairdos of the late 1930s, indole molecules, 
especially polymerized indoles, as in Imipolex G— 
_ . Wait—which one of them was thinking that? Monitors, 
get a fix on it, hurry up— 

But the target slips away. “They handle their own 
security down inside,” the young rail is telling Slothrop, 
“we're here for Surface Guard only. Our responsibility 
ends at Stollen Number Zero, Power and Light. It’s really 
a pretty soft racket for us.” Life is good, and nobody's 
looking forward much to redeployment. There are frau- 
leins for screwing, cooking, and doing your laundry. He 
can put Slothrop on to champagne, furs) cameras, ciga- 
rettes. . . . Can’t just be interested in rockets, can he, 
that’s crazy. He’s right. - . 


~ In the Zone 347 


One of the sweetest fruits of victory, after sleep and 
looting, must be the chance: to ignore no-parking signs. 
There are struck Ps in circles up all over the place, nailed 
on trees, wired on girderwork, but the main tunnel en- 
trances are pretty well blocked with vehicles by the time 
the dimpled Mercedes arrives. “Shit,” hollers the young 
tanker, turns off his engine and leaves the German short 
at no particular angle on the broad muddy apron. Leaving 
keys in the car too, Slothrop’s learning to notice items 
like this. ... 

The entrance to the tunnel is shaped like a parabola. 
The Albert Speer Touch. Somebody during the thirties 
was big on parabolas anyhow, and Albert Speer was in 
charge of the New German Architecture then, and later 
he went on to become Minister of Munitions, and nominal 
chief customer for the A4. This. parabola here happens 
to be the inspiration of a Speer disciple named Etzel 
Olsch. He had noted this parabola shape around on Auto- 
bahn overpasses, sports stadiums u.s.w., and thought it 
was the most contemporary thing he’d ever seen. Imagine 
his astonishment on finding that the parabola was also 
the shape of the path intended for the rocket through 
space. (What he actually said was, “Oh, that’s nice.”) 
It was his mother who'd named him after Attila the Hun, 
and nobody ever found out why. His parabola has a high 
loft to it, and the railroad tracks run in underneath, steel 
into shadows. Battened cloth camouflage furls back at the 
edges. The mountain goes sloping away above, rock crop- 
ping out here and there among the bushes and the trees. 

Slothrop presents his sooper dooper SHAEF' pass, 
signed off by Ike and even more authentic, by the colonel 
heading up the American “Special Mission V-2” out of 
Paris: A Waxwing specialty of the house. B Company, 
47th Armored Infantry, 5th Armored Division appears to 
be up to something besides security for this place.. Slo- 
throp is shrugged on through. There is a lot of moseying, 
drawling, and country humor around here. Somebody 
must've been picking his nose. A couple days later Slo- 
throp will find a dried piece of snot on the card, a crystal 
brown visa for Nordhausen. 

In past the white-topped guard towers. Transformers 
buzz through the spring morning. Someplace chains rattle 

and a tailgate drops. Between ruts, high places, ridges 


348 Gravity’s Rainsow 


of mud are beginning to dry out in the sun, to lighten and 
crumble. Nearby the loud wake-up yawn and stretch of 
a train whistle cuts loose. In past a heap of bright metal 
spheres in daylight, with a comical sign PLEEZ NO 
SQUEEZ-A DA OXYGEN-A UNIT, EH? how long, how long 
you sfacim-a dis country, . . . In under parabola and 
parable, straight into the mountain, sunlight gone, into 
the cold, the dark, the long echoes of the Mittelwerke. 

There is that not-so-rare personality disorder known as 
Tannhduserism. Some of us love to be taken under moun- 
tains, and not always with horny expectations—Venus, 
Frau Holda, her sexual delights—no, many come, actually, 
for the gnomes, the critters smaller than you, for the 
sepulchral way time stretches along your hooded strolls 
down here, quietly through courtyards that go for miles, 
with no anxiety about getting lost. . . no one stares, no 
one is waiting to judge you . .. out of the public eye... 
even a Minnesinger needs to be alone . . . long cloudy- 
day indoor walks . . . the comfort of a closed place, where 
everyone is in complete agreement about Death. 

Slothrop knows this place. Not so much from maps he 
had to study at the Casino as knowing it in the way you 
know someone is there... . 

Plant generators are still supplying power. Rarely a 
bare bulb will hollow out a region of light. As darkness 
is mined and transported from place to place like marble, 
so the light bulb is the chisel that delivers it from its 
inertia, and has become one of the great secret ikons of 
the Humility, the multitudes who are passed over by God 
and History. When the Dora prisoners went on their 
rampage, the light bulbs in the rocket works were the first 
to go: before food, before the delights to be looted out 
of the medical lockers and the hospital pharmacy in 
Stollen Number 1, these breakable, socketless (in Ger- 
many the word for electric socket is also the word for 
Mother—so, motherless too) images were what the “lib- 
erated” had to take... . 

The basic layout of the plant was another inspiration 
of Etzel Olsch, a Nazi inspiration like the parabola, but 
again also a symbol belonging to the Rocket. Picture the 
letters SS each stretched lengthwise a bit. These are the 


two main tunnels, driven well over a mile into the moun- 


In the Zone 349 


tain. Or picture a ladder with a slight S-shaped ripple in 
it, lying flat: 44 runglike Stollen or cross-tunnels, linking 
the two main ones. A couple hundred feet of rock moun- 
tain, at the deepest, press down overhead. 

But the shape is more than an elongated SS. Appren- 
tice Hupla comes running in one day to tell the architect. 
“Master!” he’s yelling, “Master!” Glsch has taken up quar- 
ters in the Mittelwerke, insulated from the factory down 
a few private drifts that don’t appear on any map of the 
place. He’s getting into a grandiose idea of what an archi- 
tect’s life should be down here, insisting now on the title 
“Master” from all his helpers. That isn’t his only eccen- 
tricity, either. Last three designs he proposed to the 
Fuhrer all were visually in the groove, beautifully New 
German, except that none of the buildings will stay up. 
They look normal enough, but they are designed to fall 
down, like fat men at the opera falling asleep into some- 
one’s lap, shortly after the last rivet is driven, the last 
forms removed from the newly set allegorical statue. This 
is Olsch’s “deathwish” problem here, as the little helpers 
call it: it rates a lot of gossip in the commissary at meals, 
and beside the coffee urns out on the gloomy stone load- 
ing docks. . . . It’s well after sunset now, each desk in 
this vaulted, almost outdoor bay has its own incandescent 
light on. The gnomes sit out here, at night, with only 
their bulbs shining conditionally, precariously . . . it all 
might go dark so easily, in the next second. . . ..Each 

- gnome works in front of his drawing board. They’re work- 
ing late. There’s a deadline—it’s not clear if they’re work- 
ing overtime to meet it, or if they have already failed 
and are here as punishment. Back in his office, Etzel 
Olsch can be heard singing. Tasteless, low beer-hall songs. 
Now he is lighting a cigar. Both he and the gnome 
Apprentice Hupla who’s just run in know that this is an 
exploding cigar, put in his humidor as a revolutionary 
gesture by persons unknown but so without power that 
it doesn’t matter—“Wait, Master, don’t light it—Master, 
put it out, please, it’s an exploding cigar!” 

“Proceed, Hupla, with the intelligence that prompted 
your rather rude entrance.” 

~— “But—” 


“Hupla . . .” Puffing masterful clouds of cigar smoke. 


350 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


“Tt-it’s about the shape of the tunnels here, Master.” 

“Don’t. flinch like that, I based that design on the 
double lightning-stroke, Hupla—the SS emblem,” 

“But it’s also a double imtegral sign! Did you know 
that?” 

“Ah, Yes: Summe, Summe, as Leibniz said. Well, isn’t 
that—” 

BLAM. 

All right. But Etzel Glsch’s genius was to be fatally 
receptive to imagery associated with the Rocket. In the 
static space of the architect, he. might've used a double 
integral now and then, early in his career, to find volumes 
under surfaces whose equations were known—amasses, mo- 
ments, centers of gravity. But ‘it’s been years since he’s 
had to do with anything that basic. Most of his calculating 
these days as with marks and pfennigs, not functions of 
idealistic r and 0, naive x and y. .. . But in the dynamic 
space of the living Rocket, the double integral has a dif- 
ferent meaning. To integrate here is to operate on a rate 
of change so that time falls away: change is stilled. 
“Meters per second” will integrate to “meters.” The mov- 
ing vehicle is frozen, in space, to become architecture, 
and timeless. It was never launched. It will never fall. 

In the guidance, this is what happened: a little pendu- 
lum was kept centered by a magnetic field. During launch, 
pulling gs, the pendulum would swing aft, off center. 
It had a coil attached to it. When the coil moved through 
the magnetic field, electric current flowed in the coil. As 
the pendulum was pushed off center by the acceleration 
of launch, current would fow—the more acceleration, the 
more flow. So the Rocket, on its own side of the flight, 
sensed acceleration first. Men, tracking it, sensed position 
or distance first. To get to distance from acceleration, the 
Rocket had to integrate twice—needed a moving coil, 
transformers, electrolytic cell, bridge of. diodes, one tetrode 
(an extra grid to screen away capacitive coupling inside © 
the tube), an elaborate dance of design precautions to 
get to what human eyes saw first of all-rthe distance © 
along the flight path, 

There was that backward symmetry again, one that . 
Pointsman missed, but Katje didn’t. “A life of its own,” 
she said, Slothrop remembers her reluctant smile, the 


In the Zone 351 


Mediterranean afternoon, the peeling twist of a eucalyptus 
trunk, the same pink, in that weakening light, as the 
American officer’s trousers Slothrop wore once upon a 
time, and the acid, the pungent smell of the leaves... . 
The current, flowing in the coil, passed a Wheatstone 
bridge and charged up a capacitor. The charge was the 
time integral of the current flowing in the coil and bridge. 
Advanced versions of this so-called “IG” guidance inte- 
grated twice, so that the charge gathering on one side 
of the capacitor grew directly as the distance the Rocket 
had traveled. Before launch, the other side of the cell 
had been charged up to a level representing the distance 
to a particular point out in space. Brennschluss exactly 
here would make the Rocket go on to hit 1000 yards east 
of Waterloo Station. At the instant the charge (Bix) 
accumulating in flight equaled the preset charge (Air) on 
the other side, the capacitor discharged. A switch closed, 
fuel cut off, burning ended. The Rocket was on its own. 
That is one meaning of the shape of the tunnels down 
here in the Mittelwerke. Another may be the ancient rune 
that stands for the yew tree, or Death. The double integral 
stood in.Etzel Olsch’s subconscious for the method of 
finding hidden centers, inertias unknown; as if’monoliths 
had been left for him in the twilight, left behind by some 
corrupted idea of “Civilization,” in which eagles cast in 
concrete stand ten meters high at the corners of the sta- 
diums where the people, a corrupted idea of “the People” 
are gathering, in which birds do not fly, in which imagi- 
_hary centers far down inside the solid fatality of stone 
are thought of not as “heart,” “plexus,” “consciousness,” 
(the voice speaking here grows more ironic, closer to 
tears which are not all theatre, as the list goes on . . .) 
“Sanctuary,” “dream of motion,” “cyst of the eternal pres- 
ent,” or “Gravity's gray eminence among the councils of 
the living stone.”. No, as none of these, but instead a 
point in space, a point hung precise as the point where 
burning must end, never launched, never to fall. And 
what is' the specific shape whose center of gravity is the 
Brennschluss Point? Don’t jump at an infinite number of 
possible shapes. There’s only one. It is most likely an 
interface between one order of things and another. There’s 
a Brennschluss point for every firing site. They still hang 


352 Graviry’s RaInsow 


up there, all of them, a constellation waiting to have a 
13th sign of the Zodiac named for it . . . but they lie so 
close to Earth that from many places they can’t be seen 
at all, and from different places inside the zone where 
they can be seen, they fall into completely different pat- 
terns.... 

Double integral is also the shape of lovers curled asleep, 
which is where Slothrop wishes he were now—all the way 
back with Katje, even lost as he might feel again, even 
more vulnerable than now—even (because he still hon- 
estly misses her), preserved by accident, in ways he can’t 
help seeing, accident whose own much colder honesty 
each lover has only the other to protect him from... . 
Could he live like that? Would They ever agree to let 
him and Katje live like thatP He’s had nothing to say 
to anyone about her. It’s not the gentlemanly reflex that 
made him edit, switch names, insert fantasies into the 
yarns he spun for Tantivy back in the ACHTUNG office, 
so much as the primitive fear of having a soul captured 
by a likeness of image or by a name. . . . He wants to 
preserve what he can of her from Their several entropies, 
from Their softsoaping and Their money: maybe he thinks 
that if he can do it for her he can also do it for himself 
. . . although that’s awful close to nobility for Slothrop 
and The Penis He Thought Was His Own. 

In the sheet-metal ducting that snakes like a spine along 
the overhead, plant ventilation moans. Now and then it 
sounds like voices. Traffic from somewhere remote. It’s 
not as if they were discussing Slothrop directly, under- 
stand. But he wishes he could hear it better. . . . b= 

Lakes of light, portages of darkness. The concrete fac- 
ing of the tunnel has given way to whitewash over chunky 
fault-surfaces, phony-looking as the inside of an amuse- 
ment-park cave. Entrances to cross-tunnels slip by like 
tuned pipes with an airflow at their mouths . . . once upon 
a time lathes did screech, playful machinists had shoot- 
outs with little brass squirt cans of cutting oil . . . knuckles 
were bloodied against grinding wheels, pores, creases and 
quicks were stabbed by the fine splinters of steel . .. 
tubeworks of alloy and glass contracted tinkling in‘ air — 
that felt like the dead of winter, and amber light raced — 
in phalanx among the small neon bulbs. Once, all this — 
did happen. It is hard down here in Mittelwerke to live — 


In the Zone 353 


‘in the present for very long. The nostalgia you feel is 


not your own, but it’s potent. All the objects have grown 
still, drowned, enfeebled with evening, terminal evening. 
Tough skins of oxides, some only a molecule thick, shroud 
the metal surfaces, fade out human reflection. Straw- 
colored drive belts of polyvinyl alcohol sag and release 
their last traces of industrial odor. Though found adrift 
and haunted, full of signs of recent human tenancy, this 
is not the legendary ship Marie-Celeste—it isn’t bounded 
so neatly, these tracks underfoot run away fore and aft 
into all stilled Europe, and our flesh doesn’t sweat and 
pimple here for the domestic mysteries, the attic horror 
of What Might Have Happened so much as for our knowl- 
edge of what likely did happen .. . it was always easy, 
in open and lonely places, to be visited by Panic wilder- 
ness fear, but these are the urban fantods here, that come 
to get you when you are lost or isolate inside the way 
time is passing, when there is no more History, no time- 
traveling capsule to find your way back to, only the late- 
ness and the absence that fill a great railway shed after 
the capital has been evacuated, and the goat-god’s city 
cousins wait for you at the edges of the light, playing 
the tunes they always played, but more audible now, 
because everything else has gone away or fallen silent... 
barn-swallow souls, fashioned of brown twilight, rise to- 
ward the white ceilings . . . they are unique to the Zone, 
they answer to the new Uncertainty. Ghosts used to be 
either likenesses of the dead or wraiths of the living. But 
here in the Zone categories have been blurred badly. The 
status of the name you miss, love, and search for now 
has grown ambiguous and remote, but this is even more 
than the bureaucracy of mass absence—some still live, 
some have died, but many, many have forgotten which 
they are. Their likenesses will not serve. Down here are 
only wrappings left in the light, in the dark: images of 
the Uncertainty. ... 

Post-A4 humanity is moving, hammering, and shouting 
among the tunnels. Slothrop will catch sight of badged 
civilians in khaki, helmet liners with cx .stenciled on, 
sometimes getting a nod, eyeglasses flashing under a dis- 
tant light bulb, most often ignored. Military working par- 
ties go at route-step bitching in and out, carrying crates. 
Slothrop is hungry and Yellow James is nowhere in sight. 


354 Gravity's Rainsow 


But there is nobody down here even going to say howdy 


to, much less feed, the free lance Ian Scuffling. No, wait, 
- by golly here comes. a delegation of girls in tight pink 
lab coats reaching just to the tops of bare thighs, tripping 
up the tunnel on stylish gold wedgies “Ah, so reizend ist!” 
too many to hug at once, “Hiibsch, was?” now now ladies 
one at a time, they are giggling and reaching to drape 
around his neck lush garlands of silvery B nuts and flange 
fittings, scarlet resistors and bright-yellow capacitors 
strung like little sausages, scraps of gasketry, miles of 
aluminum shavings as curly-bouncy ‘n’ bright as Shirley 
Temple’s head—hey Hogan ya can keep yer hula girls— 
and where are they taking him here? into an empty 
Stollen, where they all commence a fabulous orgy, which 
goes on for days and days, full of poppies, play, singing, 
and carrying on. 

Moving into Stollen 20 and up, traffic grows heavier. 
This was the Aq part of the factory, which the Rocket 
shared with V-1 and turboprop assemblies. Out of these 
Stollen, the 20s, 30s, and 40s, Rocket components were 
fed out crosswise into the two main assembly lines. As 
you walk deeper, you retrace the Rocket’s becoming: 
superchargers, center sections, nose assemblies, power 
units, controls, tail sections . . . lotta these tail sections 
still around here, stacked alternately fins up/fins down, 
row on row identical, dimpled ripply metal surfaces. Slo- 
throp moseys along looking at his face in them, watching 
it warp and slide by, just a big underground fun house 
here folks. . . . Empty dollies with small metal wheels 
chain away back down the tunnel: they carry four-bladed 
arrowhead shapes that point at the ceiling—oh. Right— 
the pointed holders must’ve fit inside the expansion noz- 
zles of the thrust chambers, sure enough here comes a 


bunch of them, big fucking things tall as Slothrop, capital — 


As painted in white near the bumer cups. . . . Overhead - 


the fat and sinuous white-lagged pipes are lurking, and ~ 
the steel lamps give no light out of their scorched skullcap — 
_ reflectors . . . down the. tunnel’s centerline run Lally © 


columns, slender, gray, the exposed thr locked in rust 
. of long standing . . . blue shadows wash through the 
spare-parts cages, set on planking and I beams hung from 


damp and chimney-sized columns of brick . . . glass- — 


In the Zone 355 


wool insulation lies beside the tracks, heaped like 
“snow.... 

Final assembly went on in Stollen 41. The cross-tunnel 
is 50 feet deep, to accommodate the finished Rocket. 
Sounds of carousing, of voices distinctly unbalanced, come 
welling up, reverberating off of the concrete. Personnel 
are weaving back up the main tunnel with a glassy and 
rubicund. look to their faces. Slothrop squints down into 
this long pit, and makes out a crowd of Americans and 
Russians gathered around a huge oak beer barrel. A 
gnome-size German civilian with a red von Hindenburg 
mustache is dispensing steins of what looks to be mostly 
head. Ordnance smoke-puffs flicker on nearly every sleeve. 
The Americans are singing 


Rocker LIMERICKS 


There once was a thing called a V-2, 

To pilot which you did not need to— 
You just pushed a button, 

And it would leave nuttin’ 

But stiffs and big holes and debris, too. 


The tune is known universally among American fra- 
ternity boys. But for some reason it is being sung here 
in German Storm Trooper style: notes clipping off sharp 
at the end of each line, then a pulse of silence before the 
attack on the next line. 


[Refrain:] Ja, ja, ja, jal 
In Prussia they never eat pussy! 
There ain’t hardly cats enough, 
There’s garbage and that’s enough, 
So waltz me around again, Russky! 


Drunks are hanging from steel ladders and draped over 
catwalks. Beer fumes crawl in the long cavern, among 
pieces of olive-drab rocket, some upright, some lying on 
their sides. 


There was a young fellow named Crockett, 
Who had an affair with a rocket. ; 
If you saw them out there 

You’d be tempted to stare, 

But if you ain’t tried it, don’t knock it! 


356 Gravirty’s Ramnsow 


Slothrop is hungry and thirsty. Despite the clear and 
present miasma of evil in Stollen 41, he starts looking for 
some way to go down there and maybe score some of that 
lunch. Turns out the only way down is by a cable, hooked 
to an overhead hoist. A fat cracker Pfc. lounges at the 
controls, sucking on a bottle of wine. “Go ahead, Jackson, 
I'll give you a good ride. They taught me how to nm 
these in the WPA.” Bracing his mustache in what he 
~ figures to be a stiff upper lip, Ian Scuffling climbs on, 
one foot through an eye-splice, the other hanging free. 
An electric motor whines, Slothrop lets go the last steel 
railing and clutches on to the cable as 50 feet of twilit 
space appears underneath him. Uh... 

Rolling out over Stollen 41, heads milling far below, 
beer foam bobbing like torches in the shadows—suddenly 
the motor cuts off and he’s falling like a rock. Oh fuck, 
“Too young!” he screams, voice pitched way too high so 
it comes out like a teenager on the radio, which ordinarily 
would be embarrassing, but here’s the concrete floor rush- 
ing up at him, he can see every shuttering mark, every 
dark crystal of Thuringian sand he’s going to be splashed 
over—not even a body nearby to get him off with only 
multiple fractures. . . . With about ten feet to go the Pfc. 
puts on the brakes. Maniacal laughter from above and 
behind. The cable, brought up taut, sings under Slothrop’s 
hand till he loses his grip on it, falls, and is carried gently 
upside down and hanging by the foot, in among fun- 
seekers around the beer keg who, used to this form of 
arrival by now, only continue their singing: 


There was a young fellow named Hector, 
Who was fond of a launcher-erector. 

But the squishes and pops 

Of acute pressure drops 

Wrecked Hector’s hydraulic connector. 


Each young American in turn getting to his feet (op- 
tional), raising his tankard, and singing about different 
ways of Doing It with the A4 or its related hardware. 
Slothrop does not know that they are singing to him, 
and neither do they. He eyes the inverted scene with a 
certain unease: with his brain appro the frontiers 
of red-out, there comes to him the peculiar notion that 


ag ae 


In the Zone 357 


it’s Lyle Bland who has hold of his ankle here. So he 
is bome stately into the fringes of the party. “Hey!” 


_ observes a crewcut youth, “i-it’s Tarzan or something! Hal 


Hal” Half a dozen Ordnance people, juiced and roaring 
happily, grab for Slothrop. After a lot of twisting and 
shoving, the foot is freed from its wire loop. The hoist 
whines back the way it came, to its prankish operator 
and the next fool he can talk into riding it. 


There once was a fellow named Moorehead, 
Who had an affair with a warhead. 

His wife moved away _. 

The very next day— 

She was always kind of a sorehead. 


The Russians are drinking relentlessly and in silence, 
shuffling boots, frowning, maybe trying to translate these 
limericks. It isn’t clear whether the Americans are here 
on: Russian sufferance or vice versa. Somebody presses on 
Slothrop a shell-case, ice cold, foaming down the sides. 
“Gee, we weren't expecting the English too. Some party, 
huh? Stick around—he'll be along in a minute.” 

_ “Who’s that.” Thousands of these luminous worms are 
wriggling all over Slothrop’s field of vision, and his foot 
is beginning to prickle awake again. Oh, this beer here 
is cold, cold and hop-bitter, no point coming up for air, 
gulp, till it’s all—hahhhh. His nose comes up drowned 
in foam, his mustache white and bubbly too. All at once 
comes shouting from the edges of the company. “Here 
he is, here he is!” “Give hima beer!” “Hi there, Major, 
babes, sir!” 


There was a technician named Urban, 

Who had an affair with a turbine. 

“Tt’s much nicer,” he said, 

“Than a woman in bed, 
And it’s sure as hell cheaper than bourbon!” 


' “What's happening,” inquires Slothrop through: the 
head of another beer just materialized in his hand. 


“It's Major Marvy. This is his going-away party.” 
Marvy’s Mothers are all singing “For He’s a Jolly Good 
Fellow,” now. Which nobody can deny if they know 


358 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


what’s good for them, is the impression one cannot help 
receiving. ... 

“Uh, where’s he going?” 

«“« Away.” . 

“Thought he was here to see that GE.” 

“Sure, who do ya think’s pickin’ up the tab fr this?” 

Marvy here by subterranean light is even less engaging 
than he was in the moonlight on top of that boxcar. The 
rolls of fat, bulging eyes and glistening teeth are grayer 
here, screened more coarsely. A strip. of adhesive tape 
plastered athletically over the bridge of his nose, and a 
purple, yellow, and green decoration around one eye 
testify to his rapid journey down the railroad embank- 
ment the other night. He is shaking hands with his well- 
wishers, booming male endearments, paying special atten- 
tion to the Russians—“Well, bet you've spiked that with 
a little vodka! Hah?” moving on “Vlad, fella, how’s yer 
ass!” The Russians do not appear to understand, which 
leaves them only the fanged smile, the Easter-egg eyes, 
to make sense of. Slothrop is just snorting foam out of 
his nose when Marvy spots him, and those eyes bug out 
in earnest. 

“There he is,” in a great roar, indicating Slothrop with 
a trembling finger, “by God the limey sonofabitch go git 
him, boys!” Go git him, boys? Slothrop continuing to gaze 
a moment here at this finger, illuminated in cute flourishes 
and curlicues of cherubic fat. ; 

“There, there, my man,” begins Ian Scuffling, by which 
point hostile faces have begun to close in. Hmm. . . . Oh, 
that’s right, escape—he sloshes beer at the head nearest, 
heaves the empty shell case at another, finds a gap in 
the crowd, slithers through and flees, across florid faces 
of drunks asleep, vaulting khaki paunches festooned with 
splashes of vomit, away down the deep cross-tunnel, 
among the pieces of Rocket. 

“Reveille you hammerheads,” Marvy’s screaming, “don’t 
let that ’sucker git away!” A sergeant with a boy’s face _ 
and gray hair, dozing with a grease gun cradled against © 
him, wakes up crying, “Krauts!” lets loose a deafening | 
burst from his weapon straight into the beer barrel, which — 
destroys the bottom half and sends a great gush of wet 
-amber and foam surging among the pursuing Americans, — 


=) 
Ei 


| Seat “In the Zone 359 


half of whom promptly slip and go down on their ass. 
Slothrop reaches the other end of the Stollen with a good 
lead, and goes sprinting up 2 ladder there, taking rungs | 
two at a time. Shots— Terrific blasts in this soundbox. 
Either Marvy’s Mothers are too drunk, or the darkness is 
saving him. He hits the top out of breath. 

In the other main tunnel now, Slothrop falls into a jog 
down the long mile to the outside, trying not to wonder 
if he has the wind to make it. He hasn’t gone 200 feet 
when the vanguard comes clambering up off of that lad- 
der behind him. He dodges into what must be a paint 

_ shop, skids on a patch of wet Wehrmacht green, and goes 
down, proceeding through big splashes of black, white, 
and red before coming to rest against the combat boots 
of an elderly man in a tweed suit, with white, water- 
buffalo mustaches. “Gruss Gott.” 

“Say, I think they're trying to kill me back there. Is 
there someplace—”’ 

The old man winks, motions Slothrop through the 
Stollen and on into the other main tunnel. Slothrop 
notices a pair of coveralls streaked with paint, and thinks 
to grab them. Past four more Stollen, then a sharp right. 
It’s a metal storage area. “Watch this.” The old man goes 
chuckling down the long shop among blue racks of cold- 
rolled sheets, heaps of aluminum ingots, sheafs of 3712 
bar stock, 1624, 723... . “This is going to be good.” 

“Not that way, man, that’s the one they’re coming 
down.” But this oversize elf already has set about hitching 
cable from a hoist overhead to a tall bundle of Monel 
bars. Slothrop climbs into those coveralls, combs his 
pompadour down over his forehead, takes out a pocket- 
knife and saws off pieces of mustache on both sides. 

“You look like Hitler now. Now they will really want 
to kill you!” German humor. He introduces himself as 
Glimpf, Professor of Mathematics of the Technische Hoch- 
schule, Darmstadt, Scientific Advisor to the Allied Mili- 
tary Government, which takes a while. “Now—we bring 
them this way.” 

I am in the hands of a raving maniac—“Why not just — 
hide out in here, till they forget it?” But here comes dim 

‘shouts up-tunnel now: “All clear in 37 and 38, Chuckie 
babes!” “O.K., old hoss, you guys take odds we'll take 


360 Gravitry’s Rainsow 


evens.” They are not going to forget it, they are making 
a tunnel-by-tunnel search instead. It’s peacetime, they 
can’t shoot you in peacetime . . . but theyre drunk... 
oh boy. Slothrop is scared shitless. 

“What do we.do?” 

“You will be the expert in idiomatic English. Say some- 
thing provocative.” 

Slothrop sticks his head out in the long tunnel and 
hollers, in his most English accent, “Major Marvy sucks!” 

“Up this way!” Sounds of galloping GI boots, nailheads 
smacking the concrete and a lot of other ominous metal 
too going snick...snick... 

“Now,” beams mischievous Glimpf, setting the hoist in 
motion. 

A fresh thought occurs to Slothrop. He puts his head 
back out and hollers “Major Marvy sucks NIGGERS!” 

“T think we should hurry,” sez Glimpf. _. 

“Aw, I just thought of a good: one about his mother.” 
Slack has been disappearing inch by inch from the bight 
of cable between the hoist and the bar stock, which 
Glimpf has rigged to topple across the doorway, hope- 
fully about the time the Americans show up. 

Slothrop and Glimpf light out through the opposite exit. 
About the time they reach the first curve in the tunnel, 
all the lights go out. The ventilation whines on. The 
phantom voices inside it gain confidence from the dark. 

The bundle of Monel falls with a great crash. Slothrop 
touches rock wall, and uses the wall then for guidance 
through this absolute blackness. Glimpf is still someplace 
in the middle of the tunnel, on the tracks. He is not 
breathing hard, but he is chuckling to himself. Behind 
are the hollow staggerings of the pursuit, but no light yet. 
There is a soft clang and sharp “Himmel” from the old 
professor. Sounds of yelling have grown louder and now 
here are the first flashlights, and it’s time to get out of 
the bathtub— 

“What's: happening? For Christ’s sake . . .” 

“Come here.” Glimpf has collided with some kind of 
miniature train, just visible now in outline—it was used 
once to show visitors from Berlin around the factory. 
They climb aboard the tractor in front, and) Glimpf fiddles 
with switches. 


f 
; 


In the Zone 361 


_ Well here we go, all aboard, lights must’ve been all that 
Marvy cut, sparks are crackling out behind and there’s 
even a little wind now. Good to be rolling. 


Ev'ry little Nazi’s shootin’ pool or playin’ potsy 

On the Mittel-werk Ex-press] 

All the funny Fascists: just a-twirlin’ their mustaches 
Where we goin’? Can’t you guess? 

Headin’ for the country just down the tracks, 

Never heard o’ shortages or in-come-tax, 

Gonna be good-times, for Minnie and-Max, 

On the: Mittel-werk Ex-press! 


Glimpf has switched on a headlamp. From side-tunnels 
booming by, figures in khaki stare. Whites of eyes give 
back the light for an instant before flicking past. A few 
people wave. Shouts go dopplering Hey-eyyy-y-y-y like 
car horns at the crossings going home at night on the 
Boston and Maine. . ... The Express is rolling at a fair 
clip. Damp wind rushes by in a whistle. In the lamp’s 
backscatter, silhouettes of warhead sections can be made 
out, stacked on the two little flatcars the engine’s towing. 
Local midgetry scuttle and cringe alongside the tracks, 
nearly out of the light. They think of the little train as 
their own, and feel hurt whenever the big people come 
to commandeer it. Some sit on stacks of crates, dangling 
their legs. Some practice handstands in the dark. Their 
eyes glow green and red. Some even swing from ropes 
secured to the overhead, in mock Kamikaze attacks on 
Glimpf and Slothrop, screaming, “Banzai, banzai,” before 
vanishing with a giggle. It’s all in play. They’re really 
quite an amiable— 

Right behind, loud as megaphones, in massed chorale: 


There once was a fellow named Slattery 
“Oh, shit,” sez Slothrop. 


Who was fond of the course-gyro battery. 
With that 50-volt shock, 

What was left of his cock 

Was all slimy and sloppy and spattery. 


Ja, ja, ja,-ja, 
In Prussia they never eat pussy, u.s.w. 


~ 


362 Gravity’s Rarnsow 


“Can you get back and uncouple those cars?” Glimpf 
wants to know. 

“Reckon so. . . .” But he seems to fumble at it for 
hours, Meantime: 


There was a young fellow named Pope, 
Who plugged into-an oscilloscope. 

The cyclical trace 

Of their carnal embrace 

Had a damn nearly infinite slope. 


“Engineers,” Glimpf mutters. Slothrop gets the cars un- 
coupled and the engine speeds up. Wind is tearing at all 
Irish pennants, collarpoints, cuffs, buckles, and belts. 
Back behind them there’s a tremendous crash and clank, 
and a few shouts in the dark. 

“Think that stopped ’em?” 

Right up their ass, in four-part harmony: 


There was a young fellow named Yuri, 
Fucked the nozzle right up its venturi. 
He had woes without cease 

From his local police, 

And a hell of a time with the jury. 


“O.—K., Jocko babes! Got that old phosphorus flare?” 

“Stand by, good buddy!” 

With only that warning, in blinding concussion the Icy 
Noctiluca breaks, floods through the white tunnel. For a 
minute or two nobody in here can see. There is only the 
hurtling on, through amazing perfect whiteness. White- 
ness without heat, and blind inertia: Slothrop feels a 
terrible familiarity here, a center he has been skirting, 
avoiding as long as he can remember—never has he been 
as close as now to the true momentum of his time: faces 
and facts that have crowded his indenture to the Rocket, 
camouflage and distraction fall away from the white 
moment, the vain and blind tugging at his sleeves it’s 
important... please ... look at us . . . but it’s already 
too late, it’s only wind, only g-loads, and the blood of his 
eyes has begun to touch the. whiteness back to ivory, to 
brushings of gold and a network of edges to the broken 
rock . . . and the hand that lifted him/away sets him 
back in the Mittelwerke— 


co 


In the Zone 363 


“Whoo-wee! There’s ’at sucker now!” 

Out of the flare, inside easy pistol range, emerges a 
lumbering diesel engine, pushing ahead of it the two cars 
Slothrop uncoupled, itself stuffed with bloodshot, di- 
sheveled, bloated Americans, and at an apex, perched lop- 

_. sided. on their shoulders, Major Marvy himself, wearing 
a-giant white Stetson, and clutching two .45 automatics. 

Slothrop ducks down behind a cylindrical object at the 
rear of the tractor. Marvy starts shooting, wildly, inspired 
by hideous laughter from the others. Slothrop happens to 
notice now that what he’s chosen to hide behind, actually, © 
seems to be another warhead. If the Amatol charges are 
still. in—say, Professor, could the shock wave from a .45 
bullet at this range succeed in detonating this warhead 
here if it struck the casing? e-even if there was no fuze 
installed? Well, Tyrone, now that would depend on many 
things: muzzle velocity, wall thickness and composition— 

-Counting at least on a pulled arm muscle and hernia, 

_ Slothrop manages to tip and heave the warhead off onto 
the track while Marvy’s bullets go whanging and crashing 
all over the tunnel. It bounces and comes to rest tilted 
against one of the rails. Good. 

The flare has begun to die. Shadows are reoccupying 
the mouths of. the Stollen. The cars ahead of Marvy hit 
the obstacle a solid WHONK! doubling. up in an inverted 
V—diesel brakes screech in panic yi-i-i-i-ke as the big 
engine derails, slews, begins to tip, Americans grabbing 
frantically for handholds, each other, empty air. Then 
Slothrop and Glimpf are around the last curve of the 
integral sign, and there is another huge crash behind 
them, screaming that prolongs, echoing, as they see now 
the entrance ahead, growing parabola of green mountain- 
slopes, and sunlight... . 

“Did you have a car when you came?” inquires the 
twinkling Glimpf. 

peer Slothrop recalls the keys still in that Mercedes. 
{ , 2”? 

Glimpf eases on the brakes as they coast out under 
the parabola into daylight, and roll to a smooth and 
_ respectable stop, They flip salutes at the B Company sen- 

' tries and proceed to hijack the Mercedes, which is right 
Re panere that rail left it. 


364 Graviry’s RAInBow 


Out on the road, Glimpf gestures them north, watching 
Slothrop’s driving with a leery eye. They wind snarling 
up into the Harz, in and out of mountain shadows, pine 
and fir odors enveloping them, screeching around curves 
and sometimes nearly off of the road. Slothrop has the 
inborn gift of selecting the wrong gear for all occasions, 
and anyhow he’s jittery, eye in the mirror and out the 
‘back of his head aswarm with souped-up personnel car- 
riers and squadrons of howling Thunderbolts. Coming 
around a blind corner, using the whole width of the pave- 
ment to make it—a sharp road-racing trick he’ happens 
to know—they nearly buy it from a descending American 
Army deuce-and-a-half, the words fucking idiot cleariy 
visible on the mouth of the driver as they barely scoot 
past, heartbeats slamming low in their throats, mud from 
the truck’s rear tires slapping over them in a great wing 
that shakes the rig and blots out half the windshield. 

The sun is well past its zenith when they pull up, 
finally, below a forested dome with a small dilapidated 
castle on top, hundreds of doves, white teardrops, drip- 
ping from its battlements. The green breath of the woods 
has sharpened, grown colder. 

They climb a switchbacking path strewn with rocks, 
among dark firs toward the castle in the sunlight, jagged 
and brown above as a chunk of bread left out for all its 
generations of birds. 

“This is where you're staying?” 

“I used to work here. I think Zwitter might still be 
around,” There wasn’t enough room in the Mittelwerke 
for many of the smaller assembly jobs. Control systems 
mainly. So they were put together in beerhalls, shops, 
schools, castles, farmhouses all around Nordhausen here, 
any indoor lab space the guidance people could find. 
Glimpf’s colleague Zwitter is from the T.H. in Munich. 
“The usual Bavarian approach to electronics.” Glimpf be- 
gins to frown. “He’s bearable, I suppose.” Whatever 
mysterious injustices spring from a eet) approad to 
electronics now remove Glimpf’s twinkle, and keep him 
occupied in surly introspection tthe rest of "ithe way up. — 

Mass liquid cooing, damped in white fiuff, greets them 
as they slip in a side entrance to the castle. Floors are 
dirty and littered with bottles and scraps of papers. Some 
of the papers are stamped with the magenta GEHEIME 


In the Zone 365 


| KOMMANDOSACHE. Birds fly in and out of broken windows. 
' Thin beams of light come in from chinks and erosions. 


Dust motes, fanned by the doves’ wings, never stop bil- 
lowing here. Walls are hung with dim portraits of nobles 
in big white Frederick the Great hairdos, ladies with 


\ smooth faces and oval eyes in low-necked dresses whose 


yards of silk spill out into the dust and wingbeats of the 
dark rooms. There is dove shit all over the place. 

_ By contrast, Zwitter’s laboratory uptsairs is brightly lit, 
well-ordered, crammed with blown glass, work tables, 


lights of many colors, speckled boxes, green folders—a 


mad Nazi scientist lab! Plasticman, where are you? 

There’s only Zwitter: stocky, dark hair parted down the 
middle, eyeglass lenses thick as the windows of a bathy- 
sphere, the fluorescent hydras, eels, and rays of control 
equations swimming seas behind them... . 

But when they see Slothrop, there is immediate clear- 
ing there, and glazed barriers come down. Hmm, T.S., 
what’s this? Who are these people? What’s happened to 
the apples in old Glimpf’s cheeks? What's a Nazi guidance 
expert doing this side of the fence at Garmisch, with his 
lab intact? 


OH ...thu’s... 

Nazis in the woodwork, 

Fascists in the walls, 

Little Japs with bucktooth grins 
A-gonna grab yew bah th’ balls. 
Whin this war is over, 

How happy Ah will be, 

Gearin’ up fer thim Rooskies 

And Go-round Number Three... « 


O 


In the days when the white engineers were disputing the at- 
tributes of the feeder system that was to be, one of them came 
to Enzian of Bleicheréde and said, “We cannot agree on the 
chamber pressure. Our calculations show that a working pres- 

_ sure of 40 atii would be the most desirable. But all the data we 
know of are grouped around a value of only some 10 atii.” 

“Then clearly,” replied the Nguarorerue, “you must listen to 
the data.” : 

“But that would not be the most perfect or efficient value,” 
protested the German. 


366 Gravity's Rainsow 


“Proud man,” said the Nguarorerue. “What are these data, if 
not direct revelation? Where have they come from, if not from 
the Rocket which is to be? How do you presume to compare a 
number you have only derived on paper with a number that is 
the Rocket’s own? Avoid pride, and design to some compromise 
value.” 


—from Tales of the Schwarzkommando, 
collected by Steve Edelman 


In the mountains around Nordhausen and Bleicheréde, 
down in abandoned mine shafts, live the Schwarzkom- 
mando, These days it’s no longer a military title: they 
are a people now, Zone-Hereros, in exile for two genera- 
tions from South-West Africa. Early Rhenish missionaries 
began to bring them back to the Metropolis, that great 
dull zoo, as specimens of a possibly doomed race. They 
were gently experimented with: exposed to cathedrals, 
Wagnerian soirées, Jaeger underwear, trying to get them 
interested in their souls. Others were taken back to Ger- 
many as servants, by soldiers who went to put down the 
great Herero rising of 1904-1906. But only after 1933 
did most of the present-day leadership arrive, as part 
of a scheme—never openly admitted by the Nazi party— 
for setting up black juntas, shadow-states for the eventual 
takeover of British and French colonies in black Africa, 
on the model of Germany’s plan for the Maghreb. Siid- 
west by then was a protectorate administered by the 
Union of South Africa, but the real power was still with 
the old German colonial families, and they cooperated. 
-There are several underground communities now near 
Nordhausen/Bleicheréde. Around here they are known 
collectively as the Erdschweinhohle. This is a Herero joke, 
a bitter one. Among the Ovatjimba, the poorest of the 
Hereros, with no cattle or villages of their own, the totem 
animal was the Erdschwein or aardvark. They took their 
name from him, never ate his flesh, dug their food from 
the earth, just as he does. Considered outcasts, they lived 
on the veld, in the open. You were likely to come across 
them at night, their fires flaring bravely against the wind, 
out of rifle range from the iron tracks: there seemed no 
other force than that to give them locus out in that 
emptiness. You knew what they feared——not what they 
wanted, or what moved them. And you had business up- 


In the Zone A 367 


country, at the mines: so, presently, as the sputtering 


lights slipped behind, ‘so did all further need to think of 
them. ... 

But as you swung away, who was the woman alone in 
the earth, planted up to her shoulders in the aardvark 
. hole, a gazing head rooted to the desert plane, with an 

upsweep of mountains far behind her, darkly folded, far 
away in the evening? She can feel the incredible pressure, 
miles of horizontal sand and clay, against her belly. Down 
the trail wait the luminous ghosts of her four stillborn 
children, fat worms lying with no chances of comfort 
among the wild onions, one by one, crying for milk more 
sacred than what is tasted and blessed in the village 
calabashes. In preterite line they have pointed her here, 
to be in touch with Earth’s gift for genesis. The woman 
feels power flood in through every gate: a river between 
her thighs, light leaping at the ends of fingers and toes. 
It is sure and nourishing as sleep. It is a warmth. The 
more the daylight fades, the further she submits—to the 
dark, to the descent of water from the air. She is a seed 
in the Earth. The holy aardvark has dug her bed. 

Back in Siidwest, the Erdschweinhéhle was a powerful 
symbol of fertility and life. But here in the Zone, its real 
status is not so clear. 

Inside the Schwarzkommando there are forces, at pres- 
ent, who have opted for sterility and death. The struggle 
is mostly in silence, in the night, in the nauseas and 
crampings of pregnancies or miscarriages. But it is politi- 
cal struggle. No one is more troubled with it than Enzian. 
He is Nguarorerue here. The word doesn’t mean “leader” 
exactly, but “one who has been proven.” 

Enzian is also known, though not to his face, as: Otyi- 
kondo, the Half-breed. His father was a European. Not 

-that it makes him unique among the Erdschweinhdhlers 
here: there’s German, Slavic and Gypsy blood mixed in 
by now too. Over the couple of generations, moved by 
accelerations unknown in the days before the Empire, 
_ they have been growing an identity that few can see as 

ever taking final shape. The Rocket will have a final 
shape, but not its people. Eanda and oruzo have lost 

‘their force out here—the bloodlines of mother and father 


were left behind, in Siidwest. Many of the early emigrants 


368 GRAVITY’S Rubee 


had even gone over to the faith of the Rhenish Mission- 
ary Society long before they left. In each village, as noon 
flared the shadows in tightly to their owners, in that 
moment of terror and refuge, the omuhona took from his 
sacred bag, soul ‘after converted soul, the leather cord 
kept there since the individual’s birth, and untied the 
birth-knot. Untied, it was another soul dead to the tribe. 
. So today, in the Erdschweinhéhle, the Empty Ones each 
carry one knotless strip of leather: it is a bit of the old 
symbolism they have found useful. 

They call themselves Otukungurua. Yes, old: Africa 
hands, it ought to be “Omakungurua,” but they are always 
careful—perhaps ‘it’s less healthy than care—to point out 
that oma- applies only to the living and human. Otu- 
is for the inanimate and the rising, and this is how they 
imagine themselves. Revolutionaries of the Zero, they 
mean to carry on what began among the old Hereros after 
the 1904 rebellion failed. _They want a negative birth 
rate. The program is racial suicide. They would finish the 
extermination the Germans began in 1904. » 

A generation earlier, the declining number of live 
Herero births was a topic of medical interest throughout 
southern Africa. The whites. looked on as, anxiously, as 
they would have at an outbreak of rinderpest among the 
cattle. How provoking, to watch one’s subject population 
dwindling like this, year after year. What’s a colony with- 


out its dusky natives? Where’s the fun if they're all going — 


to die off? Just a big hunk of desert, no more maids, no 
field-hands, no laborers for the construction or the min- 
ing—wait, wait a minute there, yes it’s: Karl Marx, that 
sly old racist skipping away with his teeth together and 
his eyebrows up trying to make believe it’s nothing but 
Cheap Labor and Overseas Markets. . .. Oh, no. Colonies 


are much, much more. Colonies are the outhouses of the 


European soul, where a fellow can let his pants down 


and relax, enjoy the smell of his own shit, Where he can — 


fall on his slender prey roaring as loud. as he feels like, 
-and guzzle her blood with open joy. Eh? Where he can 
just wallow and rut and let himself go in a softness, a 
receptive darkness of limbs, of hair as — as the hair 
on his own forbidden genitals. Where the: poppy, and 


cannabis and coca grow full and green, and not to the | 


In the Zone — 369 — 


colors and style of death, as do ergot and agaric, the 
blight and fungus native to Europe. Christian Europe was 
always death, Karl, death and repression. Out and down 
in the colonies, life can be indulged, life and sensuality 
in all its forms, with no harm done to the Metropolis, 
nothing to soil those cathedrals, white marble statues, 
noble thoughts. ... No word ever gets back. The silences 
down here are vast enough to absorb all behavior, no 
matter how dirty, how animal it gets... . 

Some of the more rational men of medicine attributed 
the Herero birth decline to a deficiency of Vitamin E in 
the diet—others to poor chances of fertilization given the 

‘peculiarly long and narrow uterus of the Herero female. 
But underneath all this reasonable talk, this scientific 
speculating, no white Afrikaner could. quite put down 
the way it felt... . Something sinister was moving out 
in the veld: he was beginning to look at their faces, 

_ especially those of the women, lined beyond the thorn 
fences, and he knew beyond logical proof: there was a 
tribal mind at work out here, and it had chosen to commit 
suicide. . . . Puzzling. Perhaps we weren't as fair as we 
might have been, perhaps we did take their cattle and 
their lands away . . and then the work-camps of course, 
the barbed wire and the stockades. . . Perhaps they feel 
it is a world they no longer want to live in. Typical of 
them, though, giving up, crawling away to die... why 
won't they even negotiate? We could work out a solution, 
some solution. ... 

It was a simple choice for the Hereros, bétween two 
kinds of death: tribal death, or Christian death. Tribal 
death made sense. Christian death made none at all. It 
seemed an exercise they did not need. But to the Euro- 
peans, conned by their own Baby Jesus Con Game, what 
‘they were witnessing among these Hereros was a mystery 

potent as that of the elephant graveyard, or the lemmings 
tushing into the sea. 

Though they don’t admit it, the Empty Ones now 
exiled in the Zone, Europeanized in language and thought, 
split off from the old tribal unity, have found the why 

_ of it just as mysterious. But they’ve seized it, as a sick 
woman will seize a charm. They calculate no cycles, no 
* _.returns, they are in love _ the glamour of a whole 


370 Gravity's RaInBow 


people’s suicide—the pose, the stoicism, and the. bravery. 
These Otukungurua are prophets of masturbating, spe- 
cialists in abortion and sterilization, pitchmen for acts oral 
and anal, pedal and digital, sodomistical and zoophiliac— 
their approach and their game is pleasure: they are spiel- 
ing earnestly and well, and Erdschweinhohlers are lis- 
tening. 

The Empty Ones can guarantee a day when the last 
Zone-Herero will die, a final zero to a collective history 
fully lived. It has appeal. 

There is no outright struggle for power. It is all seduc- 
tion and counterseduction, advertising and pornography, 
and the history of the Zone-Hereros is being decided in 
bed. 

Vectors in the night underground, all trying to flee a 
center, a force, which appears to be the Rocket: some 
immachination, whether of journey or of destiny, which 
is able to gather violent political opposites together in 
the Erdschweinhéhle as it gathers fuel and oxidizer in 
its thrust chamber: metered, helmsmanlike, for the sake 
of its scheduled parabola. 

Enzian sits this evening under his mountain, behind 
him another day of schemes, expediting, newly invented 
paperwork—forms he manages to destroy or fold, Japa- 
nese style, before the day’s end, into gazelles, orchids, 
hunter-hawks. As the Rocket grows toward its working 
shape and fullness, so does he evolve, himself, into a new 
_ configuration. He feels it. It’s something else to worry 
about. Late last night, among the blueprints, Christian 
and Mieczislav looked up, abruptly smiled, and fell silent. 
A transparent reverence. They study the drawings as if 
_ they were his own, and revelations. This is not flattering 
to him. 

What Enzian. wants to create will have no history. It 
will never need a design change. Time, as time is known: 
to the other nations, will wither away inside this new 
one. The Erdschweinhihle will not be bound, like the 
Rocket, to time. The people will find the Center again, 
the Center without time, the journey without hysteresis, 
where every departure is a return to the ats place, the 
only place. . 

He has thus himself found a strange ‘rapprochement 


In the Zone 371 


rs with the Empty Ones: in particular with Josef Ombindi 


of Hannover. The Eternal Center can easily be seen as 
the Final Zero. Names and methods vary, but the move- 


-ment toward stillness is the same. It has led to strange 


passages between the two men. “You know,” Ombindi’s 
eyes rolled the other way, looking up at a mirror-image 
of Enzian that only he can see, “there’s . . . well, some- 
thing you ordinarily wouldn’t think of as erotic—but it’s 
really the most erotic thing there is.” 

“Really,” grins Enzian, flirting. “I can’t think of what 


_ that would be. Give me a clue.” 


“It’s a non-repeatable act.” 

“Firing a rocket?” 

“No, because there’s always another rocket. But there’s 
nothing—well, never mind.” 

“Ha! Nothing to follow it with, that’s what you were 
going to say.” 

“Suppose I give you another clue.” 

“All right.” But. Enzian has already guessed: it’s there 
in the way he holds his jaw and is just about to laugh... . 

“It embraces all the Deviations in one single act.” 
Enzian sighs, irritated, but does not call him on this use 
of “Deviations.” Bringing up the past is part of Ombindi’s 
game. “Homosexuality, for example.” No rise. “Sadism and 
masochism. -Onanism? Necrophilia. . . .” 

“All those in the same act?” 

All those, and more. Both know by now that what’s 
under discussion is the act of suicide, which also includes 
bestiality (“Think how sweet,” runs the pitch, “to show 
mercy, sexual mercy to that hurt and crying animal”), 
pedophilia (“It is widely reported that just at the edge 
you grow glaringly younger”), lesbianism (“Yes, for as the 
wind blows through all the emptying compartments the 
two shadow-women at last can creep out of their cham- 
bers in the dying shell, at the last ashen shoreline, to 
meet and embrace .. .”), coprophilia and urolagnia (“The 
final convulsions . . .”), fetishism (“A wide choice of 


- death-fetishes, naturally . . .”). Naturally. The two of 


Bu 


them sit there, passing a cigarette back and forth, till 


its smoked down to a very small stub. Is it idle talk, or 


is Ombindi really trying to hustle Enzian here? Enzian’s 


$4 


3 


‘got to be sure before he moves. If he comes out sez, 


372 Gravity's RAINBOW 


“This is a hustle, right?” and turns out it isn’t, well— But 
the alternative is so strange, that Enzian is, in some way, 
being 


SoLD ON SUICIDE 


Well I don’t care-for, th’ things I eat, 
Can’t stand that boogie-woogie beat— 
But I’m sold, on, suicide! 


You can keep Der Bingle too, a- 
And that darn “bu-bu-bu-boo,” 
Cause I’m sold on suicidel 


Oh! I'm not too keen on ration stamps, 
Or Mothers who used to be baby vamps, 
But I’m sold, on, suicidel 


Don’t like either, the Cards or Browns, 
Piss on the country and piss on the town, 
But I’m S.O.S., yes well actually this goes on, | 
verse after verse, for quite some time. In its complete 
version it represents a pretty fair renunciation of, the 
things of the world. The trouble with it is that by Gédel’s 
Theorem there is bound to be some item around that one 
has omitted from the list, and such an item is not easy | 
to think of off the top of one’s head, so that what one 
does most likely is go back over the whole thing, mean- 
time correcting mistakes and inevitable repetitions, and | 
putting in new items that will surely have occurred to | 
one, and—well, it’s easy to see that the “suicide” of the 
title might have to be postponed indefinitely] 
Conversations between Ombindi and Enzian these days. 
are thus a series of commercial messages, with Enzian 
not so much mark as unwilling shill, standing in for the 

rest of the tip, who may be listening and maybe not. 
“Ahh, do I see your cock growing, Nguarorerue?P ea. 
no, no, perhaps you are only thinking of someone you 
loved, somewhere, long ago . . . back in Siidwest, eh?” 
To allow the tribal past to disperse, all) memories ought 
to be public record, there’s no point in preserving history 
with that Final Zero to look forward to. . . . Cynically, | 


RO ae Ae 
ay In the Zone 373 


_ though, Ombindi has preached this in the name of the 
old Tribal Unity, and it’s a weakness in his pitch all 
right—it looks bad, looks like Ombindi’s trying to make 
believe the Christian sickness never touched us, when 
everyone knows it has infected us all, some to death. Yes 
‘it is a little bit jive of Ombindi here to look back toward 
an innocence he’s really only heard about, can’t himself 
believe in—the gathered purity of opposites, the village 
_ built like a mandala: .. . Still he will profess and proclaim 
_ it, as an image of a grail slipping through the room, 
_ radiant, though the jokers around the table be sneaking 
' Whoopee Cushions into the Siege Perilous, under the very 
descending arse of the grailseeker, and though the grails 
themselves come in plastic these years, a dime a dozen, 
’ penny a gross, still Ombindi, at times self-conned as any 
Christian, praises and prophesies that era of innocence he 
just missed living in, one of -the last pockets of Pre- 
Christian Oneness left on the planet: “Tibet is a special 
case. Tibet was deliberately set aside by the Empire as 
free and neutral territory, a Switzerland for the spirit 
where there is no extradition, and Alp-Himalayas to draw 

the soul upward, and danger rare enough to tolerate. . 
Switzerland and Tibet are linked along one of the true 
meridians of Earth, true as the Chinese have drawn 
meridians of the body. . . . We will have to learn such 
new maps of Earth: and as travel in the Interior becomes 
more common, as the maps grow another dimension, so 
must we. ...” And he tells too of Gondwanaland, before 
the continents drifted apart, when Argentine lay snuggled 
up to Siidwest .. .' the people listen, and filter back to 
cave and bed and family calabash from which the milk, 
unconsecrated, is swallowed in cold whiteness, cold as the 

_ morth.... 

So, between these two, even routine greeting does not 
pass without some payload of meaningfulness. and the 
hope of Blitzing the other’s mind. Enzian knows that he 
is being used for his name. The name has some magic. 
But he has been so unable to touch, so neutral for so 
long . . . everything has flowed away but the name, 
_»Enzian, a sound for chanting. He hopes it will be magic 
_ enough for one thing, one good thing when the time 


te 
_ comes, however short of the Center. . ... What are these 


374 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


persistences among a people, these traditions and offices, 
but traps? the sexual fetishes Christianity knows how to 
flash, to lure us in, meant to remind us of earliest infant 
love. . ... Can his name, can “Enzian” break their power? 
Can his name prevail? 

The Erdschweinhéhle is in one of the worst traps of 
all, a dialectic of word made flesh, flesh moving toward 
something else. . . . Enzian sees the trap clearly, but not 
the way out. . . . Sitting now between a pair of candles 
just lit, his gray field-jacket open at the neck, beard 
feathering down his dark throat to shorter, sparser glossy 
black hairs that go running in a whirl, iron aad about 
the south pole of his Adam’s apple... pole... axis . 
axle-tree.... Tree. . Omumborombanga 7% > Mukuru 

. first ancestor . 3 Adamionit salt sweating, hands 
from the working day gone graceless and numb, he has 
a minute to drift and remember this time of day back in 
Siidwest, above ground, participating in the sunset, out 
watching the mist gather, part fog; part dust from the 
cattle returning to the kraals to milking and sleep... 
his tribe believed long ago that each sunset is a battle. 
In the north, where the sun sets, live the one-armed war- 
riors, the one-legged and one-eyed, who fight the sun 
each evening, who spear it to death until ‘its blood runs 
out over the horizon and sky. But under the earth, in the 
night, the sun is born again, to come back each dawn, 
new and the same. But we, Zone-Hereros, under the earth, 
how long will we wait in this north, this locus of death? 
Is it to be reborn? or have we really been buried for the 
last time, buried facing north like all the rest of our dead, 
and like all the holy cattle ever sacrificed to the ancestors? 
North is death’s region. There may be no gods, but there 
is a pattern: names by themselves may have no magic, 
but the act of naming, the physical utterance, obeys the 
pattern. Nordhausen means dwellings in the north. The 
Rocket had to be produced out of a place called Nord- 
hausen. The town adjoining was named Bleicheréde as a 
validation, a bit of redundancy so that the message would 
~ not be lost. The history of the old sar is one of lost 

messages. It began in mythical times, when the sly hare 
who nests in the Moon brought death among men, instead 


of the Moon’s true message. The true message has never 
* 


: ee In the Zone 375 


come. Perhaps the Rocket is meant to take us there some- 
day, and then Moon will tell us its truth at last. There are 
those down in the Erdschweinhéhle, younger ones who’ve 
only known white autumn-prone Europe, who believe 
_ Moon is their destiny. But older ones can remember that 
_ Moon, like Ndjambi Karunga, is both the bringer of evil 
' and its avenger.... 

And Enzian’s found the name Bleicheréde close enough 
te “Blicker,” the nickname the early Germans gave to 
Death. They saw him white: bleaching and blankness. 
The name was later Latinized to “Dominus Blicero.” 
Weissmann, enchanted, took it as his SS code name. En- 
zian was in Germany by then. Weissmann brought the 
new name home to his pet, not showing it off so much as 

_ indicating to Enzian yet another step to be taken toward 
the Rocket, toward a destiny he still cannot see past this 
sinister cryptography of naming, a sparse pattern but one 
that harshly will not be denied, that cries and nags him 
on stumbling as badly as 20 years ago.... 

Once he could not imagine a life without return. Be- 
fore his conscious memories began, something took him, in 
and out of his mother’s circular village far out in the 
Kakau Veld, at the borders of the land of death, a de- 
parture and a return.... He was told about it years later. 
Shortly after he was born, his mother brought him back 
to her village, back from Swakopmund. In ordinary times 
she would have been banished. She’d had the child out of 

_ wedlock, by a Russian sailor whose name she couldn’t 
2 Bee nce, But under the German invasion, protocol was 

r s important than helping one another. Though the 
‘murderers in blue came down again and again, each time, 
somehow, Enzian was passed over. It is a Herod myth his 
admirers still like to bring up, to his annoyance. He had 
been walking only for a few months when his mother took 
him with her to join Samuel Maherero’s great trek across 

the Kalahari. 

Of the stories told about these years, this is the most 
tragic. The refugees had been on the desert for days. 

_ Khama, king of the Bechuanas, sent guides, oxen, wagons 

_ and water to help them. Those who arrived first were 
_ warned to take water only little by little. But by the time 
the stragglers arrived, everyone else was asleep. No one 


376 Gravity's’ Ratnsow 


to wam them. Another lost message. They drank till they 
died, hundreds of souls. Enzian’s mother was among them. 
He had fallen asleep under a cowhide, exhausted from 
hunger and thirst. He woke among the dead. It is said 
that he was found there by a band:of Ovatjimba, taken 
and cared for. They left him back at the edge of his 
mother’s village, to walk in alone. They were nomads, 
they could have taken any other direction in that waste 
country, but they brought him back to the place he’d left. 
He found hardly anyone remaining there. Many had gone 
on the trek, some had been taken away to the coast and 
herded into kraals, or to work on the railroad the Germans 
were building through the desert. Many others had died 
eating cattle dead of rinderpest. 

No. return. Sixty per cent of the Herero people had Beis 
exterminated, The rest were being used like animals. En- 
zian grew up into a white-occupied world. Captivity, sud- 
den death, one-way departures were the ordinary things 
of every day. By the time the question occurred to him, he 
could find no way to account for his own survival. He 
could not believe in any process of selection; Ndjambi 
Karunga and the Christian God were too far away. There 
was no difference between the behavior of a god and the 
operations of pure chance. Weissmann, the European 
whose protégé he became, always believed he’d seduced 
Enzian away from religion, But the gods had gone away 
themselves: the gods -had left the people.... He let 
Weissmann think what he wanted to. The man’s thirst for 
guilt was insatiable as the desert’s for. water. 

It’s been a long time now since the two men have seen 
each other. Last time they spoke was during the move from 
Peenemiinde down here to the Mittelwerke. Weissmann is 
probably dead by now. Even in Siidwest, 20° years ago, 
before Enzian could even speak his language, he’d seen 
that: a love for the last explosion—the lifting and the 
scream that peaks past fear.... Why should Weissmann 
want to survive the war? Surely he’d have found some- 
thing splendid enough to match his thirst. It could not 
have ended for him rationalized and meek as his hundred 
glass bureaus about the SS circuit—located in time and 

space always just to miss grandeur, only to be in its 
vacuum, to be tugged slightly along by its slipstream but 


COUPE A aS SWNT ARS 


In the Zone SOME 


finally left to lie still again in a few tarnished sequins of 
_ wake. Biirgerlichkeit played to Wagner, the brasses faint 
and mocking, the voices of the strings drifting in and out 
of phase. ... 
At night down here, very often lately, Enzian will wake 
‘for no reason. Was it really Him, pierced Jesus, who came 
to lean over you? The white faggot’s-dream body, the 
slender legs and soft gold European eyes...did you 
catch a glimpse of olive cock under the ragged loincloth, 
did you want to reach to lick at the sweat of his rough, 
his wooden bondage? Where is he, what part of our Zone 
ge damn him to the knob of that nervous imperial 


There are few such islands of down and velvet for him 
to lie and dream on, not in these marble passages of power. 
Enzian has grown cold: not so much a fire dying away as 
a positive coming on of cold, a bitter taste growing across 

' the palate of love’s first hopes.... It began when Weiss- 
mann brought him to Europe: a discovery that love, among 
_ these men, once past the simple feel and orgasming of it, 
had to do with masculine technologies, with contracts, with 
winning and losing. Demanded, in his own case, that he. 
enter the service of the Rocket.... Beyond simple steel 
erection, the Rocket was an entire system won, away from 
_ the feminine darkness, held against the entropies of lovable 
_ but scatterbrained Mother. Nature: that was the first thing 
~ he was obliged by Weissmann to learn, his first step to- 
ward citizenship in the Zone. He was led to believe that 
by understanding the Lge he would come to under- 
stand truly his manhood. . 
. “T used to imagine, in some naive way I have lost now, 
__ that all the excitement of those days was being put on for 
_ me, somehow, as a gift from Weissmann. He had carried 
_ me over his threshold and into his house, and this was the 
life he meant to bring me to, these manly pursuits, devo- 
tion to the Leader, political intrigue, secret re-arming in 
naughty defiance of the aging plutocracies all around us 
... they were growing impotent, but we were young and 
' et . to be that young and strong, at such a time in 
‘the life af a nation! I could not believe so many fair young 
te _ men, the way the sweat and dust lay on their bodies as 
_they lengthened the Autobahns day into ringing day: we 


378 Gravity's RaiInsow 


drove among mp iia: silk banners impeccably tailored 
as suits of clothes... the woman seemed to move all doc- 
ile, without color... I thought of them in ranks, down on 
all se having their beasts milked into pails of shining 
stee 

“Was he ever jealous of the other young men—the way 
you felt about them?” 

“Oh. It was still very physical for me then. But he had 
already moved past that part.of it. No. No, I don’t think 
he minded. ... I loved him then, I could not see into him, 
or the things he believed in, but I wanted to. If the 
Rocket was his life, then I would belong to the Rocket.” 

“And you never doubted him? He certainly hadn’t the 
most ordered personality—” 

“Listen—I don’t know how to say this... have you ever 
been a Christian?” 

“Well... at one time.” 

“Did you ever, in the street, see a man that you knew, 
in the instant, must be Jesus Christ—not hoped he was, or 
caught some resemblance—but knew. The Deliverer, re- 
turned and walking among the people, just the way the 
old stories promised ...as you approached you grew more 
and more certain—you could see nothing at all to con- 
tradict that first amazement... you drew near and passed, 
terrified that he would speak to you... your eyes grap- 
pled... it was confirmed. And most terrible to all, he 
knew. He saw into your soul: all your make-believe ceased 
to matter... .” 

“Then... what’s happened, since your first days in 
Europe, could be described, in Max Weber’s phrase, al- 
most as a ‘routinization of charisma.” | 

“Outase,” sez Enzian, which is one of many Herero 
words for shit, in this case a large, newly laid cow turd. — 

Andreas Orukambe sits in front of any army-green, — 
wrinkle-finished transmitter/receiver rig, off in a rock al- 
cove of the room. A pair of rubber headphones covers his — 
ears. The Schwarzkommando use the 50 cm band—the > 
one the Rocket’s Hawaii II guidance operated on. Who > 
but rocket-maniacs would listen in at 53 cm? Schwarz- 
kommando can be sure, at least, that they're being moni- 
tored by every competitor in the Zone. Transmissions from 
the Erdschweinhohle begin around 0300 and run till dawn. 


: 
vi 
3 


Lae 


In the Zone 379 


4 ‘Other Schwarzkommando stations broadcast on their own 


schedules. Traffic is in Herero, with a German loan-word 
now and then (which is too bad, since these are usually 
technical words, and :valuable clues for whoever’s listen- 
ing). 

Andreas is on the second dog watch, now, copying 
mostly, answering when he has to. Keying any transmitter 


- is an invitation to instant paranoia. There springs into being 


an antenna pattern, thousands of square kilometers full of 
enemies out in their own night encampments in the Zone, 


faceless, monitoring. Though they are in contact with one 


5 


| 


another—the Schwarzkommando try to listen in to as 
much as they can—though there can be no illusion about 
their plans for the Schwarzkommando, still they are hold- 
ing off, waiting for the optimum time to move in and 
destroy without a trace. ... Enzian believes they will wait 
for the first African rocket to be fully assembled and ready 
for firing: it will look better if they move against a real 
threat, real hardware. Meantime Enzian tries to keep 
security tight. Here at the home base it’s no problem: 
penetration by less than a regiment would be impossible. 
But farther out in the Zone, ‘rocket-towns like Celle, En- 
schede, Hachenburg—they can pick us off out there one 
by one, first a campaign of attrition, then a coordinated 
raid... leaving then only this metropolis, under siege, to 
strangle. ye et 

Perhaps it’s ‘theater, but they seem no longer to be 
Allies . .. though the history they have invented for them- 
selves conditions us to expect “postwar rivalries,” when in 
fact it may all be a giant cartel including winners and 
losers both, in an amiable agreement to share what is there 
to be shared.... Still, Enzian has played them off, the 
quarreling scavengers, one against the other... it looks 
genuine enough.... Marvy must be together with the 
Russians by now, and with General Electric too—throw- 
ing him off the train the other night bought us—what? a 
day or two, and how well have we used the time? 

It comes down to this day-to-day knitting and unravel- 
ing, minor successes, minor defeats. Thousands of details, 
any one of which carries the chance of a fatal mistake. 
- Enzian would like to be more out of the process than he 
 is—to a able to see where it’s going, to know, in real 


380 Gravity’s Rainsow | 


time, at each splitting of the pathway of decision, which 
would have been right‘ and» which wrong. But it is their 
time, their space, and he still expects, naively, outcomes 
the white continuum grew past hoping for centuries ago. 
The details—valves, special tools that may or may not exist, 
Erdschweinhohle jealousies and plots, lost operating man- 
uals, technicians on the run from both East and West, 
food shortages, sick children—swirl like fog, each particle 
with its own array of forces and directions’. . . he can’t 
handle them all at the same time, if he stays too much 
with any he’s in danger of losing others. . . . But it’s not 
only the details. He has the odd. feeling, in moments of 
reverie or honest despair, that he is speaking lines pre- 
pared somewhere far away (not far away in space, but 
in levels of power), and that his decisions are not his own 
at all, but the flummeries of an actor impersonating a 
leader. He has dreamed of being held in the pitiless 
emprise of something from which he cannot wake... 
he is often aboard a ship on a broad river, leading a 
rebellion which must fail: For reasons of policy, the rebel- 
lion is being allowed to go on for a bit. He is being 
hunted, his days are full of narrow escapes which he finds 
exciting, physically graceful ... . and the’ Plot itself! it 
has a stern, an intense beauty, it is music, a symphony 
of the North, of an Arctic voyage, past headlands of very 
green ice, to the feet of icebergs, kneeling in the grip of 
this incredible music, washed in seas blue as blue dye, 
an endless North, vast country settled by people whose 
old culture and history are walled off by a great silence 
from the. rest of the world ... . the names of their penin- 
sulas and seas, their long and powerful rivers are unknown 
down in the temperate world . .. it is a return, this 
voyage: he has grown old inside his name, the sweeping 
music of the voyage is music he wrote himself, so long 
ago that he has forgotten it completely . . . but now it is 
finding him again. ... : . 

“Trouble in Hamburg—” Andreas is scribbling away, 
lifting one earpiece back smock damp with sweat so that 
he can be on both ends of the link at on “Sounds like 
it might be the DPs again. Got a ba 
fading —” 

Since the surrender. there have been these constant 
skirmishes between the German civilians and foreign 


signal. Keeps 


Seah Sc 


In the Zone 381 


prisoners freed from the camps. Towns in the north have 
been taken over by displaced Poles, Czechs, Russians 
who've looted the arsenals and granaries and mean to hold 
what they’ve taken. But nobody knows how to feel about 
the local Schwarzkommando. Some see only the ragged 
pieces of SS uniform, and respond to. that one way or 
another—others take them for Moroccans or Indians 
drifted somehow over the mountains from Italy. Germans 
‘still remember the occupation of the Rhineland 20 years 
ago by French colonial units, and the posters screaming 
SCHWARZE BESATZUNG AM RHEIN! Another stress in the 
pattern. Last week in Hamburg, two Schwarzkommando 
were shot. Others were badly beaten. The British military 
government sent in some troops, but only after the killing 
was over. Their main interest seemed to be in enforcing 
a curfew. 

“Tt’s Onguruve.” Andreas hands over the earphones and 
swivels to roll out of Enzian’s way. 

“... can’t tell. if it’s us they want, or the oil refinery 
... the voice goes crackling in and out, “... hundred, 
maybe two hundred ... so many .. . —fles, clubs, hand- 
guns—” oeReT 

Bl-bleep and a burst of hissing, then in laps a familiar 
voice, “I can bring a dozen men.” 

“Hannover’s answering,” Enzian murmurs, trying to 
sound amused. 

“You mean Josef Ombindi.” Andreas is not amused. 

Now Onguruve, calling for help, is neutral on the 
Empty Ones Question, or tries to be. But if Ombindi can 
bring a relief force to Hamburg, he may decide to stay. 
Hannover, even with the Volkswagen plant there, is only 
a stepping-stone for him. Hamburg would give the Empty 
Ones a stronger power base, and this could be the oppor- 
tunity. The north ought to be their native element, any- 


way... 
Til have to go,” handing the phones back to Andreas. 
“What's wrong?” 
“Could be the Russians, trying to draw you out.” 
. “It’s all right. Stop worrying about Tchitcherine. I don’t 
think he’s up there.” 
__ “But your European said—” 
_ “Him? I don’t know how far to trust him. Remember, 
J did hear him talking with Marvy on the train. Now ~ 


5 


“a 


382 Graviry’s Rainsow 


he’s with Tchitcherine’s girl in Nordhausen. I mean, woul 
you trust him?” is 

. “But if Marvy’s chasing him now, it might mean he’: 
worth something.” - is 

“If he is, we're sure to see him again,” ' 

Enzian grabs his kit, swallows two Pervitins for the 
road, reminds Andreas of a business’ detail or two fo: 
tomorrow, and climbs the’ long salt and stone ramps tc 
the surface. 

Outside, he breathes the evergreen air of the Harz. 
In the old villages, it would be the time of evening fo! 
the milking. The first. star is out, okanumaihi, the little 
drinker of sweet milk... . Dae 

_ But this must be a different star; a northern star. There 
is no comfort. What has happened to us? If choices have 
never been our own, if the Zone-Hereros are meant to live 
in the bosom of the Angel who tried to destroy us in 
Siidwest . . . then: have we been passed over, or have 
we been chosen for something even more terrible? 

Enzian has to be in Hamburg before another spearing 
of the sun. Security on the trains is troublesome, but the 
sentries know him. The long freights are rolling out from 
the Mittelwerke day and night, carrying A4 hardware 
west to the Americans, north to the English . . . and 
soon, when the. new map of the occupation goes into 
effect, east to the Russians too. . . . Nordhausen will be 
under Russian administration and we should have some 
action then . . . will it give him a chance at Tchitcherine? 
Enzian has never seen the man, but they are meant to 
come together, Enzian is his half-brother. They are the 
same flesh. . 

His sciatic nerve is throbbing now. Too much sitting. 
He goes limping, alone, head still down for the low clear- 
ances back down in the Erdschweinhéhle—who knows 
what waits out here for the head held too highP Down 
the road to the railway overpass, tall and gray in the 
growing starlight, Enzian is heading into the North, ... 


er 

ul 
Just before dawn. A hundred feet below flows a pallid 
sheet of cloud, stretching west as far as they can see. 


r hs = 
In the Zone — 383 


fere are Slothrop and the apprentice witch Geli Tripping, 
anding up on top of the Brocken, the very plexus of 
erman evil, twenty miles north by northwest of the Mit- 
lwerke, waiting for the sun to rise. Though May Day 
ve’s come and gone and this frolicking twosome are 
early a month late, relics of the latest Black Sabbath still 
main: Kriegsbier empties, lace undergarments, spent 
fle cartridges, Swastika-banners of ripped red satin, tat- 
oing-needles and splashes of blue ink— “What the heck 
as that for?” Slothrop wondered. 

“For the devil’s kiss, of course,” Geli snuggling oh-you- 
d-silly up to his.armpit there, and Slothrop feeling a 
ttle icky and square for not knowing. But then he knows 
xt to nothing about witches, even though there was, 
. his ancestry, one genuine Salem Witch, one of the last 
. join the sus. per coll. crowd dangling, several of them 
ack through the centuries’ couplings, off of the Slothrop 
mily tree. Her name was Amy Sprue, a family renegade 
med Antinomian at age 23 and running mad over the 
erkshire countryside, ahead of Crazy Sue Dunham by 
90 years, stealing babies, riding cows in the twilight, 
crificing chickens up on Snodd’s Mountain. Lot of ill 
ill about those chickens, as you can imagine. The cows 
id babies always, somehow, came back all right. Amy 
prue was not, like young skipping Dorothy’s antagonist, 
mean witch. 


She headed’ for Rhode Island, seeking some of that 


asylum, 
And she thought she’d stop by Salem on her way, 
But they didn’t like her style, and they didn’t like 
her smile, : 3 
‘So she never saw that Narragansett Bay.... 


‘They busted her for witchery and she got death. An- 
her of Slothrop’s crazy kinfolks.. When she was men- 
oned aloud at all it was with a shrug, too far away really 
) be a Family Disgrace—more of a curiosity. Slothrop 
a up not quite knowing what to think about her. 
itches were certainly not getting a fair shake in the 


irties. They were depicted as hags who called you 
arie, not exactly a’ wholesome lot. The movies had not 
4 


spared him for this Teutonic version here. Your kraut 


2 
ers 


384 Graviry’s Rainsow 


witch, for example, has six toes on each foot and no hz 
_ at all on her cunt. That is how the witches look, anyho 
in the stairway murals inside the one-time Nazi trar 
mitter tower up on the Brocken here, and governme 
murals are hardly places to go looking for irresponsik 
fantasy, right? But Geli thinks the hairless cunt deriv 
from the women von Bayros drew. “Aw, you just dot 
wanna shave yours,” crows Slothrop. “Ha! Ha! Son 
witch!” 

“Tll show you something,” she sez, which is why th 
are now awake at this ungodly hour, side by side, holdit 
hands, very still as the sun begins to clear the horizo 
“Now watch,” Geli whispers: “out there.” 

As the sunlight strikes their backs, coming in near 
flat on, it begins developing on the pearl cloudbank: tv 
gigantic shadows, thrown miles overland, past Clausth< 
Zelterfeld, past Seesen and Goslar, across where the riv 
Leine would be, and reaching toward Weser. ... “I 
golly,” Slothrop a little bit nervous, “it’s the Specter.” Yc 
got it up around Greylock in the Berkshires too. Arour 
these parts it is known as the Brockengespenst. 

God-shadows. Slothrop raises an arm. His fingers a 
cities, his biceps is a province—of course he’ raises : 
arm. Isn’t it expected of himP The arm-shadow trai 
rainbows behind as it moves reaching eastward for 
grab at Gottingen. Not ordinary shadows, either—thre 
dimensional ones, cast out on the German dawn, yes ar 
Titans had to live in these mountains, or under them. . . 
Impossibly out of scale. Never to be carried by a rive 
Never to look to a horizon and think that it might go « 
forever. No trees to climb, no long journeys to take . . 
only their deep images are left, haloed shells lying pro: 
above the fogs men move in... . 

Geli kicks a leg out straight asa dancer, and tilts h 
head to the side. Slothrop raises his middle finger to tl 
west, the headlong finger darkening three miles of clot 
per second. Geli grabs for Slothrop’s cock. Slothrop lea 
to bite Geli’s tit. They are enormous, dancing the flo 
of the whole visible sky. He reaches underneath her dre 
She twines a leg around one of his. The spectra wash re 
to indigo, tidal, immense, at all their edges. Under tl 
clouds out there it’s as still, and lost, as Atlantis. 


Toe 


In the Zone 385 


But the Brockengespenstphinomen is confined to dawn’s 
ander interface, and soon the shadows have come shrink- 
g back to their owners. 
“Say, did that Tchitcherine ever—” 
“Tchitcherine’s too busy for this.” . 
“Oh, and I'm some kind of a drone or something.” 
“You're different.” 
“We-e-e-ll .. . he ought to see it.” 
She looks at him curiously, but doesn’t ask why—her 
eth halt on her lower lip, and the warum (varoom, 
Plasticman sound) hovers trapped in her mouth, Just 
well. Slothrop doesn’t know why. He’s no help to any- 
dy who’s fixing to interrogate. Last night he and Geli 
undered onto a Schwarzkommando picket outside one 
the old mine entrances. The Hereros threw questions 
him for an hour. Oh, just wandering about you know, 
oking for a bit of the odd, what we call “human inter- 
t,” fascinating of course, we're always interested in what 
uu chaps are up to. . . . Geli snickering in the darkness. 
hey must have known her. They didn’t ask her anything. 
When he brought it up later, she wasn’t sure just what 
is is between Tchitcherine and the Africans, but what- 
er it is it’s being carried on with high passion. 
“It’s hate, all right,” she said. “Stupid, stupid. The war’s 
rer. It isn’t politics or fuck-your-buddy, it’s old-time, 
ire, personal hate.” 
“Enzian?” 
“T think so.” 
They found the Brocken occupied both by American 
1d by Russian troops. The mountain lay on what was to 
> the border of the Soviet zone of occupation. The brick 
id stucco ruins of the radio transmitter and a tourist 
ytel loomed up just outside the firelight. Only a couple 
platoons here. Nobody higher than noncoms. The offi- 
rs were all down in Bad Harzburg, Halberstadt, some- 
ace comfortable, getting drunk or laid. There is a cer- 
in air of resentment up on the Brocken all right, but 
e boys like Geli and tolerate Slothrop, and luckiest of 
l, nobody seems to be connected with that Ordnance. 
Its only a moment’s safety, though. Major Marvy is 
ashing about the Harz, sending thousands of canaries 
eardiac episodes, dropping in yellow droves belly-up 


q 


386 : Graviry’s Rainsow 


out of the trees as he marauds on by hollering Git th 
limey ’sucker I don’t care how many men it takes I wa 
a fucking division you hear me boy? Only a matter of tin 
before he picks up the trail again. He’s out of his min 
Slothrop’s a little daffy, but not like this—this is real 
unhealthy, this Marvy persecution. Is it possible. . 
yup, the thought has certainly occurred to him—th 
Marvy’s in tight with those Rolls Roycers who were aft 
him in Ziirich? There may be no limit to their connectior 
Marvy is buddies with GE, that’s Morgan money, there 
Morgan money in Harvard, and surely an interlock som 
place with Lyle Bland . . . who are they, hey? why « 
they want Slothrop? He knows now for sure that Zwitt 
the mad Nazi scientist is one of them. And that kind 
old Professor Glimpf was only waiting down in the Mitte 
werke to pick up Slothrop if he showed. Jesus. If Slothre 
hadn’t snuck out after dark back down into Nordhause 
to Geli’s place, they'd have him locked up by now f 
sure, maybe beaten up, maybe dead. 

Before they head back down the mountain, they mai 
age to chisel six cigarettes and some K-rations off of tl 
sentries. Geli knows a friend of a friend who stays out c 
a farm in the Goldene Aue, a ballooning enthusiast name 
Schnorp, who is heading toward Berlin. 

“But I don’t want to go to Berlin.” - 

“You want to go where Marvy isn’t, Liebchen.” 

Schnorp is beaming, eager enough for company, ju 
back from a local PX with an armload of flat white boxe 
merchandise he plans to move in Berlin. “No:trouble,” } 
tells Slothrop, “don’t worry. I’ve done this trip hundre 
of times. Nobody bothers a balloon.” 

He takes Slothrop out in back of. the house, and he 
in the middle of a sloping green field is a wicker gondo 
beside a great heap of bright yellow and scarlet silk. 

“Real unobtrusive getaway,” Slothrop mutters. A gar 
of kids have appeared running out of an apple orchai 
to help them carry tin jerricans of gtain alcohol out ° 
the gondola. All shadows are being thrown uphill by th 
afternoon sun. Wind blows from the west. Slothrop giv: 
Schnorp a light from his Zippo to get the burner goir 
_ while kids straighten out the folds in the gasbag. Schnor 

turns up the flame till it’s shooting sideways and with 


In the Zone 387 


steady roar into the opening of the great silk bag. Chil- 
dren visible through the gap break up into wiggly heat 
waves. Slowly the balloon begins to expand. “Remember 
me,” Geli calls above the rumbling of the burner, “Till I 
see you again...” Slothrop climbs in the gondola with 
Schnorp. The balloon rises a little off the ground and is 
caught by the wind. They start to move. Geli and the 
kids have taken hold of the gondola all around its gun- 
wales, the bag still not all the way up but gathering 
speed, dragging them all as fast as their feet can move, 
giggling and cheering, uphill. Slothrop keeps as much 
out of the way as he can, letting Schnorp see that the 
flame’s pointed into the bag and that lines to the basket 
are clear. At last the bag swings vertical, across the sun, 
the inside of it going a riotous wreathing of yellow and 


scarlet heat. One by one the ground crew fall away, wav- 


ing good-by. The last to go is Geli in her white dress, 
hair brushed back over her ears into pigtails, her soft chin 
and mouth and big serious eyes looking into Slothrop’s 
for as long as she can before she has to let go. She kneels 


- in the grass, blows a kiss. Slothrop feels his heart, out 


of control, inflate with love and rise quick as a balloon. 
It is taking him longer, the longer he’s in the Zone, to 
remember to say aw quit being a sap. What is this place 
doing to his brain? 

They soar up over a stand of firs. Geli and the children 
go dwindling to shadow-strokes on the green lawn. The 
hills fall away, flatten out. Soon, looking back, Slothrop 
can see Nordhausen: Cathedral, Rathaus, Church of St. 
Blasius . . . the roofless quarter where he found Geli... . 

Schnorp nudges and points. After a while Slothrop 
makes out a convoy of four olive-drab vehicles dusting 
along toward the farm in a hurry. Marvy’s Mothers, by 
the looks of things. And Slothrop hanging from this gaudy 


beach ball. Well, all right— 


“Tm bad luck,” Slothrop hollers over a little later. 
They've found a steady course now northeastward, and 
are huddling close to the alcohol flame, collars turned up, 


_ with a gradient of must be 50° between the wind at their 


backs and the warmth in front. “I should’ve mentioned 
that. You don’t even know me, and here we're flying into 


_ that Russian zone.” 


388 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


Schnorp, his hair blown like holidays of hay, does a 
wistful German thing with his upper lip: “There are no 
zones;” he sez, which is also a line of Geli’s. “No zones 
but the Zone.” 

Before too long Slothrop has begun checking out these 
boxes here that Schnorp brought along. There are a dozen 
of them, and each contains a deep, golden custard pie, 
which will fetch a fantastic price in Berlin. “Wow,” cries 
Slothrop, “holy shit. Surely I hallucinate,” and other such 
eager junior sidekick talk. 

“You ought to have a PX card.” A sales pitc 

“Right now I can’t afford a ration stamp for an ant’s 
jockstrap,” replies Slothrop, forthrightly. 

“Well, Yl split this one pie here with you,” Schnorp 
reckons after a time, “because I’m getting kind of hungry.” 

“Oboy, oboy.” 

Well, Slothrop is just chowing on that piel enjoying 
himself, licking custard off his hands, when he happens 
to notice off in the sky, back toward Nordhausen, this 
funny dark object, the size of a dot. “Uh—” 

Schnorp looks around, “Kot!” comes up with a brass 
telescope and braces it blazing on the gunwale. “Kot, 
Kot—no markings.” i 

“I wonder...” . 

Out of air so blue you can take it between your fingers, 
rub, and bring them back blue, they watch the dot slowly 
grow into a rusty old reconnaissance plane. Presently they 
can hear its engine, snarling and sputtering, Then, as they 
watch, it banks and starts a pass. 

Along the wind between them, faintly, comes the sing- 
ing of Furies: . 


There was a young man named McGuire, 
Who was fond. of the pitch amplifier. 

But a number of shorts 

Left him covered with warts, — 

And set half the bedroom on fire. ss, 


Ja, ja, ja, jal cane 
In Prussia they never eat pussy— | 


The plane buzzes by a yard or two away, showing its 
underbelly. It is a monster, about to give birth. Out of 


ry. 


“In the Zone 389 


a little access opening peers a red face in leather helmet 
and goggles. “You limey ’sucker,” going past, “we fixin’ to 
hand your ass to you.” 

Without planning to, Slothrop has picked up a pie. 
“Fuck you.” He flings it, perfect shot, the plane peeling 
slowly past and blop gets Marvy right in the face. Yeah. 
Gloved hands paw at the mess. The Major’s pink tongue 
appears. Custard drips into the wind, yellow droplets fall 
in long arcs toward earth. The hatch closes as the recon 
plane slides away, slow-rolls, circles and heads back. 
Schnorp and Slothrop heft pies and wait. 

“There’s no cowling around that engine,” Schnorp has 
noticed, “so we'll aim for that.” Now they can see the 
dorsal side of the plane, its cockpit jammed to capacity 
with beer-sodden Americans, singing: 


There once was a fellow named Ritter, 
Who slept with a guidance transmitter. 
It shriveled his cock, 

Which fell off in his sock, 

And made him exceedingly bitter. 


A hundred yards and closing fast. Schnorp grabs Slo- 
throp’s arm and points off to starboard. Providence has 
contrived to put in their way a big white slope of cloud, 
and the wind is bringing them swiftly into it: the seething 
critter puts out white tentacles, beckoning hurry . . . hurry 
. . . and they are inside then, inside its wet and icy 
reprieve. ... 

“Now theyll wait.” 

“No,” Schnorp cupping an ear, “they’ve cut the motor. 
They're in here with us.” The swaddled silence goes on 
for a minute or two, but sure enough: 


There once was a fellow named Schroeder, 
Who buggered the vane servomotor. 

He soon grew a prong 

On the end of his schlong, 

And hired himself a promoter. 


Schnorp is fiddling with the flame, a rose-gray nimbus, 
trying for less visibility, but not too much loss of altitude. 
They float in their own wan sphere of light, without co- 


390 Gravity’s RaiInsow 


ordinates. Guacsare of granite smash blindly upward like 
fists into the cloud, trying to find the balloon. The plane 
is somewhere, with its own course and speed. There is no 
action the balloon can take. Binary decisions have lost 
meaning in here. The cloud presses in, suffocating. It con- 
denses in fat drops on top of the ios ‘Suddenly, raucous 
and hungover: 


There was a young man from Decatur, 
Who slept with a LOX generator. 

His balls and his prick 

Froze solid real quick, 

And his asshole a little bit later. 


Curtains of vapor drift back to reveal the Americans, 
volplaning along well inside ten meters and only a little 
faster than the balloon. 

“Now!” Schnorp: yells, heaving a pie at the exposed 
engine. Slothrop’s misses and splatters all over the wind- 
screen in front of the pilot. By which time Schnorp has 
commenced flinging ballast bags at the engine, leaving 
one stuck between two of the cylinders. The Americans, 
taken by surprise, reach in confusion for sidearms, gre- 
nades, machine guns, whatever it is your Ordnance types , 
carry around in the way of light armament. But they have 
glided on past, and now the fog closes in again. There 
are a few shots. 

“Shit, man, if they hit that bag—” 

“Shh. I think we got the wire from the esbuter mag- 
neto.” Off in the middle of the cloud can be heard the 
nagging whicker of an engine ee to start. Linkage 
squeaks desperately. 

“Oh, fuck!” A muffled | scream, far away. The inter- 
mittent whining grows fainter until there is silence. 
Schnorp is lying on his back, slurping pie, laughing bit- 
terly. Half of his inventory’s been thrown Away, and Slo- 
throp feels a little guilty. 

“No, no. Stop worrying. This is like the very earliest 
days of the mercantile system. We're back to that again. 
A second chance. Passages are long and hazardous. Loss 
in transit is a part of life. You have had a glimpse of the 
Ur-Markt.” 

When the clouds fall away a few minutes later, they ; 


In the Zone 391 


find themselves floating quietly under. the sun, shrouds 
dripping, gasbag still shiny with the moist cloud. No sign 
at all of Marvy’s plane. Schnorp adjusts the flame. They: 
begin to rise. g 

Toward. sundown, Schnorp gets thoughtful. “Look. You 
can see the edge of it. At this latitude the earth’s shadow 
races across Germany at 650 miles an hour, the speed of 
a jet aircraft.” The cloud-sheet has broken up into little 
fog-blankets the color of boiled shrimp. The balloon goes 
drifting, over countryside whose green patchwork the twi- 
light is now urging toward black: the thread of a little 
river flaming in the late sun, the intricate-angled pattern ~ 

- of another roofless town... _ 

The sunset is red and yellow, like the balloon. On the 
horizon the mild sphere goes warping down, a peach on 
a china plate. “The farther south you go,” Schnorp. con- 
tinues, “the faster the shadow sweeps, till you reach the 
equator: a thousand miles an hour. Fantastic. It breaks 
through the speed of sound somewhere over southern 
France—around the latitude of Carcassonne.” 

The wind is. bundling them on, north by east. “Southern 
France,” Slothrop remembers then. “Yeah, That’s where 
I broke through the speed of sound. .. .” 


kA 


The Zone is in full summer: souls are found quiescent 
behind the pieces of wall, fast asleep down curled in shell- 
craters, out screwing under the culverts with gray shirt- 
tails hoisted, adrift dreaming in the middles of fields. 
Dreaming of food, oblivion, alternate histories. . . . 

’ The silences here are retreats of sound, like the retreat 
of the surf before a tidal. wave: sound draining away, 
down slopes of acoustic passage, to gather, someplace 
else, to a great surge of noise. Cows—big lummoxes 
splotched black and white, harnessed. now for the plowing 
because German horses in the Zone are all but extinct— 

_ will drudge with straight faces right on into minefields, 
sown back in the winter. The godawful blasts go drum- 
_. ming over the farmland, horns, hide and hamburger come 
_- showering down all over the place, the dented bells lie 


+ 


a 


392 Gravity's RAINBOW 


quiet in the clover. Horses might have known to 
keep clear—but the Germans wasted their horses, squan- 
dered the race, hearding them into the worst of it, 
the swarms of steel, the rheumatic marshes, the un- 
blanketed winter chills of our late Fronts. A few might 
have found safety with the Russians, who still care for 
horses. You hear them often in the evenings. Their camp- 
fires send up rays for miles from behind the stands of 
beech, through northern-summer haze that’s almost dry, 
only enough of it to give a knife’s edge to the firelight, 
a dozen accordions and concertinas all going at once in 
shaggy chords with a reed-ringing to it, and the songs 
full of plaintive stvyehs and znyis with voices of the girl 
auxiliaries clearest of all. The horses whicker and move 
in the rustling grass. The men and women are kind, re- 
sourceful, fanatical—they are the most joyous of the 
Zone’s survivors. 

In and out of all the vibrant flesh moves the mad 
scavenger Tchitcherine, who is more metal than anything 
else. Steel teeth wink as he talks. Under his pompadour 
is a silver plate. Gold wirework threads in three-dimen- 
sional tattoo among the fine wreckage of cartilage and 
bone inside his right knee joint, the shape of it always 
felt, pain’s hand-fashioned seal, and his proudest battle 
decoration, because it is invisible, and only he can feel 
it. A four-hour operation, and in the dark. It was the 
Eastern Front: there were no sulfa drugs, no anaesthesia. 
Of course he’s proud. 

He has marched here, with his limp as permanent as 
gold, out of coldness, meadows, mystery. Officially he re- 
ports to TsAGI, which is the Central Aero and Hydro- 
dynamics Institute in Moscow. His orders mention techni- 
cal intelligence. But his real mission in the Zone is private, 
obsessive, and not—so his superiors have let him know, 
in a number of delicate ways—in the people’s interest. 
Tchitcherine guesses that this, taken literally, may be true 
enough. But he is not sure about the interests of those 
who warned him. They could have their own reasons for 
wanting Enzian liquidated in spite of what they say. Their 
differences with Tchitcherine may be over the timing, or 
the motives. Tchitcherine’s motives are not political. The 
little State he is building in the German vacuum is’ 


In the Zone 393 


founded on a compulsive need he has given up trying to 
understand, a need to annihilate the Schwarzkommando 
and his mythical half-brother, Enzian. He comes from — 


_ Nihilist: stocks: there are in his ancestry any number of 


bomb throwers and jubilant assassins. He is no relation 
at all to the: Tchitcherine who dealt the Rapallo Treaty 
with Walter Rathenau. There was a long-term operator, 
a Menshevik turned Bolshevik, in his exile and his return 
believing in a State that would outlive them all, where 
someone would come to sit in his seat at the table just 
as he: had slipped into Trotsky’s—sitters would come: and 
go but the seats would remain... well, fine. There is 
that kind of State. But then again, there is this other 
Tchitcherine’s kind, a mortal State that will persist no 
longer than the individuals in it. He is bound, in love 
and in bodily fear, to students’ who have died under the 
wheels of carriages, to eyes betrayed by nights without | 
sleep and arms that have opened maniacally to death by 
absolute power. He envies their loneliness, their willing- 
ness to go it alone, outside even a military structure, 
often without support or love from anyone. His own 
faithful network of frauleins around the Zone is a com- 
promise: he knows there’s too much comfort in it, even 
when the intelligence inputs are good. But the perceptible 
hazards of love, of attachment, are still light enough for 
him to accept, when balanced against what he has to do. 


During the early Stalin days, Tchitcherine was stationed 
in a remote “bear’s corner” (medvezhy ugolok), out in 
Seven Rivers country. In the summer, irrigation canals 
sweated a blurry fretwork across the green oasis. In the 
winter, sticky teaglasses ranked the windowsills, soldiers 
played preference and stepped outside only to piss, or to 
shoot down the street at surprised wolves with a lately 
retooled version of the Moisin. It was a land of drunken 
nostalgia for the cities, silent Kirghiz riding, endless trem- 
ors in the earth... . because of the earthquakes, nobody 
built higher than one story and so the town looked like a 
Wild West movie: a brown dirt street, lined with gran- 
 diose two- and three-story false fronts. 

He had come to give the tribesmen out here, this far 
out, an alphabet: it was purely speech, gesture, touch 


394 Gravity’s Rainsow 


among them, not even an Arabic script to replace. 
Tchitcherine coordinated with the local Likbez center, 
one of a string known back in Moscow as the “red dZurts.” 
Young and old Kirghiz came in from the plain, smelling 
of horses, sour milk and weed-smoke, inside to stare at 
slates filled with chalk marks. The stiff Latin symbols were 
almost as strange to the Russian cadre—tall Galina in her 
cast-off Army trousers and gray Cossack shirts . . . mar- 
celled and soft-faced Luba, her dear friend . . . Vaslav 
Tchitcherine, the political eye . . . all agents—though 
none thought of it this way—representing the NTA (New 
Turkic Alphabet) in uncommonly alien country. 

In the mormings after mess, Tchitcherine will usually 
mosey down to the red dZurt there, fixing to look in on 
that Galina the schoolmarm—who appeals to what must 
be a feminine linkage or two in his personality . . . well 
. . . often he'll come outside to find his morning skies 
full of sheet-lighting: gusting, glaring. Awful. The ground 
shudders just below his hearing. It might be the end of 
the world, except that it is a fairly average day, for Cen- 
tral Asia. Pulse after heavenwide pulse. Clouds, some in 
very clear profile, black and jagged, sail in armadas to- 
ward the Asian arctic, above the sweeping dessiatinas of 
grasses, of mullein stalks, rippling out of sight, green and 
gray in the wind. An amazing wind. But he stands in the 
street, out in it, hitching his pants, lapelpoints whipped 
rattling against his chest, cursing Army, Party, History— 
whatever has put him here. He will not come to love this 
sky or plain, these people, their animals. Nor look back, 
no not even in the worst marsh-bivouacs of his soul, in 
naked Leningrad encounters with the certainty of his 
death, of the deaths of comrades, fever keep any memory 

-of Seven Rivers to shelter with. No music heard, no sum- 
mer journey taken... . no horse seen cane the steppe 
in the last daylight. . 

Certainly not Galina. Galina won't even be a proper 

“memory.” Already she is more like the shape of an alpha- 
bet, the procedure for field-stripping a Moisin—yes, like re- 
membering to hold back trigger with forefinger of left 
hand as you remove bolt with right, a set of interlocking 
precautions, part of a process among the three exiles 
Galina/Luba/Tchitcherine which is working out its 


In the Zone 395 


changes, its little dialectic, until it ends, with nothing 
past the structure to remember... . 

_. Her eyes hide in iron shadows, the orbits darkened 
as if by very precise blows. Her jaw is small, square, 
levered forward, the lower teeth more apt to show when 
she speaks... . .. Hardly ever a smile. Bones in her face 
strongly curved and welded. Her aura is chalkdust, laun- 
dry soap, sweat. With desperate Luba about the edges, 
always, of her. room, at her window, a pretty hawk. Galina 
has trained her—but it’s only Luba who flies, who knows 
the verst-long dive, the talon-shock and the blood, while 
her lean owner must stay below in the schoolroom, shut 
in by words, drifts and frost-patterns of white words. 

- Light pulses behind the clouds. Tchitcherine tracks mud 
off the street into the Center, gets a blush from Luba, a 
kind of kowtow and mopflourish from the comical Chinese 
swamper: Chu Piang, unreadable stares from an early 
pupil or two. The traveling “native” schoolteacher 
Dzagyp Qulan looks up from a clutter of pastel survey 
maps, black theodolites, bootlaces, tractor gaskets, plugs, 
greasy tierod ends, steel map-cases, 7.62 mm rounds, 
crumbs and chunks of lepeshka, about to ask for a ciga- 
rette which is already out of Tchitcherine’s pocket and 
on route. 

He smiles thank you..He’d better. He’s not sure of 
Tchitcherine’s intentions, much less the Russian’s friend- 
ship. DZaqyp Qulan’s father was killed during the 1916 
rising, trying to get away from Kuropatkin’s troops and 
over the border into China—one of about 100 fleeing 
Kirghiz massacred one evening beside a drying trickle of 
river that might be traceable somehow north to the zero 
‘at the top of the world. Russian settlers, in full vigilante 
‘panic, surrounded and killed the darker refugees with 
shovels, pitchforks, old rifles, any weapon to hand. A 
common occurrence in Semirechie then, even that far 
from the railroad. They hunted Sarts, Kazakhs, Kirghiz, 
and Dungans that terrible summer like wild game. Daily 
scores were kept. It was a competition, good-natured but 
more than play. Thousands of restless natives bit the 
dust. Their names, even their numbers, lost forever. Colors 
‘of skin, ways of dressing became reasonable cause to jail, 
or beat and kill, Even speaking-voices—because rumors 
iS 
Le ‘ 


y Gj 
Cw 
PA. 


396 Gravity’s RaAInsow 


of German and Turkish agents swept along these plains 
not without help from Petrograd. This native uprisins 
was supposed to be the doing of foreigners, an interna 
tional conspiracy to open a new front in the war. Moré 
Western paranoia, based solidly on the European balance 
of power. How could there be Kazakh, Kirghiz—East 
ern—reasons? Hadn't the nationalities been happy? Hadn’ 
fifty years of Russian rule brought progress? enrichment 

Well, for now, under the current ‘dispensation in Mos 
cow, Diaqyp Qulan is the son of a national martyr. The 
Georgian has come to power, power in Russia, ancien 
and absolute, proclaiming Be Kind To The N ationalities 
But though the lovable old tyrant does what he can 
Dzaqyp Qulan remains somehow as much a “native” a: 
before, gauged day-to-day by these Russians as to hi 
degree of restlessness. His sorrel face, his long narrov 
eyes and dusty boots, where he goes on his travels anc 
what really transpires inside the lonely hide tents Ow 
There, among the auls, out in that wind, these are mys: 
teries they don’t care to enter or touch. They throw 
amiable cigarettes, construct him paper existences, usé 
him as an Educated Native Speaker. He’s allowed hi: 
function and that’s as far as it goes .. . except, now anc 
then, a look from Luba suggesting falconhood—jesses, sky 
and earth, voyages. . . . Or from Galina a silence wher 
there might have been words... . 

Here she has become a connoisseuse of silences. The 
great silences of Seven Rivers have not yet- been alpha 
betized, and perhaps never will be. They are apt at any 
time to come into a room, into a heart, returning to chall 
and paper the sensible Soviet alternatives brought ou 
here by the Likbez agents. They are silences NTA canno 
fill, cannot liquidate, immense and frightening as the er 
ments in this bear’s corner—scaled’ to a larger Earth, 
planet wilder and more distant from<the sun... . 
winds, the city snows and heat waves of Galina’s child 
hood were never so vast, so pitiless. She had to come ou 
here to learn what an earthquake felt like, and how te 
wait out a sandstorm. What would it be like to go bac! 
now, back to a city? Often she will dream some daint 
pasteboard model, a city-planner’s city, perfectly detailed 
so tiny her bootsoles could wipe out neighborhoods at : 


~ In the Zone 397 


step—at the same time, she is also a dweller, down inside 
the little city, coming awake in the very late night, blink- 
ing up into painful daylight, waiting for the annihilation, 
the blows from the sky, drawn terribly tense with the 
waiting, unable to name whatever it is approaching, know- 
ing—too awful to say—it is herself, her Central Asian 
giantness self, that is the Nameless Thing she fears... . 

These tall, these star-blotting Moslem angels . . . O, 
wie spurlos zertrate ein Engel den Trostmarkt. . . . He is 
constant back there, westward, the African half-brother 
and his poetry books furrowed and sown with Teutonic 
lettering burntwood-black—he waits, smudging the pages 
one by one, out across the unnumbered versts of lowland 
and of zonal light that slants as their autumns come 
around again each year, that leans along the planet’s 
withers like an old circus rider, tries to catch their atten- 
tion ‘with nothing more than its public face, and continues 
to fail at each slick, perfect pass around the ring. 

But didn’t Dzaqyp Qulan, now and then—not often— 
across the paper schoolroom, or by surprise in front of 
windows into the green deep open, give Tchitcherine a 
certain lookP Didn’t the look say, “Nothing you do, noth- 
ing he does, will help you in your mortality”? And, “You 
are brothers. Together, apart, why let it matter this much? 
Live. Die someday, honorably, meanly—but not by the 
Other’s hand. . . .” The light of each common autumn 
keeps bringing the same free advice, each time a little 
less hopefully. But neither brother can listen. The black 
must have found, somewhere in Germany, his own version 
of Dzaqyp Qulan, some childish native to stare him out 
of German dreams of the Tenth-Elegy angel coming, 
Wingbeats already at the edges of waking, coming to 
trample spoorless the white marketplace of his own 
exile. .. . Facing east, the black face keeping watch from 
some winter embankment or earth-colored wall of a fine- 
grained stone into low wastes of Prussia, of Poland, the 
leagues of meadow waiting, just as Tchitcherine grows 
each month now more taut and windsmooth at his west- 
ward flank, seeing History and Geopolitics move them 
surely into confrontation as the radios go screaming 

er, new penstocks in the night shudder to the touch 
with hydroelectric rage, mounting, across the empty can- 


398 Graviry’s Ramnsow 


yons and passes, skies in the day go thick with miles ot 
falling canopies, white as visions of rich men’s heavenly 
dzZurts, gaming now and still awkward, but growing, eack 
strewn pattern, less and less at play. ... 


Out into the bones of the backlands ride Tchitcherin« 
and his faithful Kirghiz companion DzZaqyp Qulan 
Tchitcherine’s horse is a version of himself—an Appaloos: 
from the United States named Snake. Snake used to be 
some kind of remittance horse. Year before last he was ix 
Saudi Arabia, being sent a check each month by a zany 
(or, if you enjoy paranoid systems, a horribly rational) 
Midland, Texas oil man to stay off of the U.S. rodeo cir 
cuits, where in those days the famous bucking broncc 
Midnight was flinging young men right and left into the 
sun-beat fences, But Snake here is not so much Midnight 
wild as methodically homicidal. Worse, he’s unpredictable 
When you go to ride him he may be indifferent, or docile 
as a maiden. But then again, with no warning, seized ou 
of the last ruffling of a great sigh, he could manage t 
kill you simply as the gesture of a hoof, the serpent tucl 
of a head toward the exact moment and spot on th 
ground that youll cease to live. No way to tell: fo: 
months he can be no trouble at all. So far he’s ignorec 
Tchitcherine. But he’s tried for Dzaqyp Qulan three times 
Twice dumb luck preserved the Kirghiz, and the thir 
time he actually hung on and rode the colt a long tim 
down to a fair kind of obedience. But each tim 
Tchitcherine goes up to Snake’s jingling picket on th 
hillside, he carries, with his leather gear and his bit o 
scarred tapestry for the horse’s back, the doubt, the in 
consolable chance that the Kirghiz didn’t really break hin 
last time. That Snake is only waiting his moment. ... 

They're riding away from the railroad: farther awa 
from the kinder zones of Earth. Black and white star 
explode down the Appaloosa’s croup and haunch. At th 
center of each of these novae is a stark circle of vacuum 
of no color, into which midday Kir, at the roadside 
have taken looks, and grinned away with a turn of = 
head to the horizon behind. | 

Strange, strange are the dynamics of oil and the way 
of oilmen. Snake has seen a lot of changes since Arabie 


In the Zone 399 


m route to Tchitcherine, who may be his other half—lot 
f horse thieves, hard riding, confiscation by this govern- 
aent and that, escapes into ever more remote country. 
‘his time, the Kirghiz pheasants scattering now at the 
ound of hooves, birds big as turkeys, black and white 
vith splashes of blood-red all around the eyes, lumbering 
or the uplands, Snake is going out into what could be 
he last adventure of all, hardly remembering now the 
vater-pipes at the oases crawling with smoke, the bearded — 
nen, the carved, nacred and lacquered saddles, the neck- 
eins of twisted goat-hide, the women pillioned and wail- 
ag with delight up into Caucasian foothills in the dark, 
arried by lust, by storm along streaks of faintest trail . . . 
mly traces spread back in a wake now over these terminal 
rasslands: shadows damping and passing to rest among 
he rout of pheasants. Momentum builds as the two riders 
lunge ahead. The smell of forests on the night slowly 
lisappears. Waiting, out in sunlight which is not theirs 
et, is‘the .. . The. . . Waiting for them, the unimagined 
reature of height, and burning... 

. + . even now in her grown up dreams, to anxious 
salina comes the winged rider, red Sagittarius off the 
hildhood placards of the Revolution. Far from rag, snow, 
acerated streets she huddles here in the Asian dust with 
er buttocks arched skyward, awaiting the first touch of 
im—of it... . Steel hooves, teeth, some whistling sweep 
f quills across her spine . . . the ringing bronze of an 
questrian statue in a square, and her face, pressed into 
he seismic earth. ... 


'“He’s a soldier,” Luba simply meaning Tchitcherine, 
and-far away from home.” Posted out to the wild East, 
nd carrying on quiet, expressionless, and clearly under 
ome official curse. The rumors are as extravagant as this 
ountry is listless. In the dayroom the corporals talk about 
‘woman: an amazing Soviet courtesan who wore cami- 
oles of white kid and shaved her perfect legs every mom- 
ag all the way to the groin. Horse-fucking Catherine, 
tmined and brilliant, brought up to date. Her lovers ran 
rom ministers down to the likes of Captain Tchitcherine, 
oY her truest. While neo-Potemkins ranged the deep 
etic for her, skilled and technocratic wolves erecting 
i 

uA : 


1 


400 Gravirty’s Rainsow P 
settlements out of tundra, entire urban abstractions ot 
of ice and snow, bold Tchitcherine was back at the cap 
tal, snuggled away in her dacha, where they played : 
fisherman and fish, terrorist and State, explorer and edg 
of the wavegreen world. When official attention wi: 
finally directed their way, it did not mean death fi 
Tchitcherine, not even exile—but a thinning out of care: 
possibilities: that happened to be how the vectors ran, | 
those days. Central Asia for a good part of his prin 
years, or attaché someplace like Costa Rica (well—! 
wishes it could be Costa Rica, someday—a release fro 
this purgatory, into shuffling surf, green nights—how | 
misses the sea, how he dreams of eyes dark and liqu 
as his own, colonial eyes, gazing down from balconies | 
rotting stone ...). : 

Meanwhile, another rumor tells of his connection wii 
the legendary Wimpe, the head salesman for. Ostarzni: 
kunde GmbH, a subsidiary of the IG. Because it is coi! 
mon knowledge that IG representatives abroad are act! 
ally German spies, reporting back to an office in Ber'| 
known as “NW7,” this story about Tchitcherine is not | 
easy to believe. If it were literally true, Tchitcheri: 
wouldn’t be here—there’s no possible way his life cou 
have been spared in favor of this somnambulism amo 
the eastern garrison towns. 

Certainly he could have known Wimpe. Their lives, :| 
a while, ran close enough in space and time. Wimpe v 
a Verbindungsman in the classic style, with a streak | 
unhealthy enthusiasm: charming, handsome in a way t) 
_ came at you in shelves or terraces of strength: amia) 
gray eyes, vertical granite nose, mouth that never qu 
ered, chin incapable of fantasies ... . dark suits, imma: 
late leather belts and silver studs, horsehide shoes t| 
gleamed under the skylights in the Czarist entrance-h: 
and across the Soviet concrete, always dapper, usu< 
correct, informed and passionate about organic chemis!/. 
his specialty and, it’s been suggested, his faith, 

“Think of chess,” in his early days around the capi. 
looking for a comparison that Russians might take to, 'r 
extravagant game of chess.” Going on|to show, if his av 
ence was receptive (he had salesman reflexes, w 
steer automatically along lines of least indifference) I} 


In the Zone 401° 


eh molecule had so many possibilities open to it, possi- 
ilities for bonding, bonds of different strengths, from car- 
on the most versatile, the queen, “the Great Catherine 
f the periodic table,” down to the little hydrogens numer- 
us and single-moving as pawns ... and the brute oppo- 
ition of the chessboard yielding, in this chemical game, 
9 dance-figures in three dimensions, “four, if you like,” 
nd a radically different idea of what winning and losing 
aeant. .« . Schwarmerei, his colleagues back home had 
auttered, finding excuses to drift away into other conver- 
ations. But Tchitcherine would have stayed. Foolish and 
omantic, he would have kept listening, even egged the 
serman on. 

How could they have failed to be observed? By and 
y, as the affair in its repressed and bloodless way pro- 
eeded, the Soviet chain of command, solicitous as any 
gth-century family, would begin to’ take simple steps 
9 keep the two apart. Conservative therapy. Central Asia. 
tut in the weeks of vague and soft intelligence, before 
he watchers quite caught the drift of things... what 
eads and tails went jingling inside the dark pockets. of 
hat indeterminacy? Since his earliest days as a detail 
nan, Wimpe’s expertise had been focused in cyclized 
yenzylisoquinolines. Those of major interest being the 
pium alkaloids and their many variations. Right. The 
pner rooms of Wimpe’s office—a suite at an older hotel— 
vere full of samples, German dope in amazing profusion, 
Nimpe the jinni of the West holding them up, vial after 
‘al, for little Tchitcherine’s face to wonder at: “Eumecon, 
2% solution of morphine... Dionine (we add on an 
thyl group, here, to the rorphine, as you see) . 
folopon and Nealpon, Pantopon and Omnopon, all oe 
ures of opium alkaloids as the soluble hydrochlorides . . 

md Glycopon, as glycero-phosphates. . . . Here is Euco- 
lal—a codeine with two hydrogens, a hydroxyl, a hydro- 
hloride”—-gesturing in the air around his basic fist— 
hanging off different parts of the molecule.” Among these 
vatent medicines, trappings and detailing were half the 
fame—‘As the French do with their dresses, nicht wahr? 
ribbon here, a pretty buckle there, to help sell a sparer 
lesign. . . Ah, this? Trivalin!” One of the jewels of his 
ine. “Morphine, and caffeine, and cocaine, all in solution, 


SS, 


402 Gravity's RAINBOw 


as the valerates, Valerian, ja—root and rhizome: you m 
have older relatives who took it years ago as a net 
tonic . . . a bit of passementerie, you might say—so1 
trimming over these bare molecules.” 

What did Tchitcherine have to sayP Was Tchitcher 
there at all? sitting back in the dingy room while the | 
cables slapped and creaked through the walls, and do 
in the street, rarely enough to matter, a droshky rattl 
whip-snapping over these black old cobblesP Or wh 
snow beat at the grimy windows? How far, in the ey 
of those who would send him to Central Asia, was 1 
far: would his simple presence in these rooms have gott 
him death automatically . . . or was there still, even 
this stage of things, enough slack to let him reply? 

“But once the pain has been taken care of . . . the si 
ple pain... beyond . . . below that. zero level of fe 
ing ...I have heard .. .” He has heard. Not the subtl 
way to get into it, and Wimpe must have known eve 
' standard opener there is. Some military men are o1 
blunt, while others are of such reckless blood there 
never a question of “holding back”’—it’s a positive 
sanity, they not only will commit horse against cann 
they will lead the charge themselves. It’s magnificent, t 
it’s not war. Wait until.the Eastern Front. By his fi 
action, Tchitcherine will have gained his reputation as 
suicidal maniac. German field commanders from Finla 
to the Black Sea will develop for him a gentlemanly c 
taste. It will be seriously wondered if the man has a 
sense of military decency at all. They will capture h 
and lose him, wound him, take him for killed in acti 
and he will go on, headlong, a raving snowman over | 
winter marshes—there'll be no wind adjustment, no fie 
change to the bottleneck fairing or deadly ogive of th 
Parabellum rounds that can ever. bring him down. He 
fond, as was Lenin, of Napoleon’s on s‘engage, et pi 
on voit, and as for plunging ahead, well, that IG mz 
hotel room may have been one of his earlier rehears | 
Tchitcherine has a way of getting together with un 
sirables, sub rosa enemies of order, counterrevolution 
odds and ends of humanity: he doesn’t plan it, it : 
happens, he is a giant supermolecule with so many 0 
bonds available at any given time, and in the drift 


In the Zone 403 


things . . . in the dance of things . . . howsoever . 

_ others latch on, and the pharmacology of the Tchitcherine 
thus modified, its onwardly revealed side-effects, can’t 
necessarily be calculated ahead of time. Chu Piang, the 
Chinese factotum in the red dzurt, knows something of 
this. The first-day°Tchitcherine came to report in to the 
place, Chu Piang knew—and tripped over his mop, not 
so much to divert attention as to celebrate the meeting. 
Chu Piang has a bond or two available himself. He is a 
living monument to the success of British trade policy — 
back during the last century. This classic hustle is still 
famous, even today, for the cold purity of its execution: 
bring opium from India, introduce it into China—howdy 
Fong, this here’s opium, opium, this is Fong—ah, so, me 
eatee!—no-ho-ho, Fong, you smokee, smokee, see? pretty 
soon Fong’s coming back for more and more, so you 
create an inelastic demand for the shit, get China to make 
it illegal, then sucker China into a couple-three disastrous 
wars over the right of your merchants to sell opium, which 
by now you are describing as sacred. You win, China . 
loses, Fantastic. Chu Piang being a monument to all this, 
nowadays whole tourist caravans come through to look at 
him, usually while he’s Under The Influence .. . “Here 
ladies and gentlemen, as you may have observed, the 
characteristic sooty-gray complexion. . . .” They all stand 
peering into his dreamstruck facies, attentive. men with 

- mutton-chop sideburns, holding pearl-gray morning hats 
in their hands, the women lifting their skirts away from 
where horrid Asian critters are seething microscopically 
across the old floorboards, while their tour leader indicates 
items of interest with his metal pointer, an instrument 
remarkably thin, thinner than a rapier in fact, often flash- 
ing along much faster than eyes can really follow—‘“His 
Need, you will notice, retains its shape under all manner 

_ of stresses. No bodily illness, no scarcity of supply seems 

to affect it a whit .. .” all their mild, their shallow eyes 

- following gently as piano chords from a suburban parlor 

_.... the inelastic Need turns luminous this stagnant air: 

it is an ingot beyond price, from which sovereigns yet may 
be struck, and faces of great administrators engraved and 
run off to signify. It was worth the trip, just to see this 
_ shining, worth the long passage by sleigh, over the frozen 


404 Gravity's Ramnsow 


steppe in an enormous closed sleigh, big as a ferryboat, 
bedizened all over with Victorian gingerbread—inside are 
decks and levels for each class of passenger, velvet 
saloons, well-stocked galleys, a young Dr. Maledetto 
whom the ladies love, an elegant menu including every- 
thing from Mille-Feuilles 4 la Fondue de la Cervelle to La 
Surprise du Vésuve, lounges amply fitted out with stere- 
opticons and a library of slides, oak toilets rubbed to a 
deep red and hand-carved into mermaid faces, acanthus 
leaves, afternoon and garden shapes to remind the sitter © 
of home when he needs it most, hot insides poised here 
so terribly above the breakneck passage of crystalline ice 
and snow, which may be seen also from the observation 
deck, the passing vistas of horizontal pallor, the wheeling 
snowfields of Asia, beneath skies of: metal baser by far 
than this we have come to watch. ... 

Chu Piang is also watching them, as they come, and 
stare, and go. They are figures in dreams. They amuse 
him. They belong to the opium: they never come if it’s 
anything else. He tries not to smoke the hashish out here, 
actually, any more than courtesy demands. That chunky, 
resinous Turkestan phantasmagoric is fine for Russian, 
Kirghiz, and other barbaric tastes, but give Chu the tears 
of the poppy any time. The dreams are better, not so geo- 
metrical, so apt to turn everything—the air, the sky— 
to Persian rugs. Chu prefers situations, journeys, comedy. 
Finding the same appetite in Tchitcherine, this stocky, 
Latin-eyed emissary from Moscow, this Soviet remittance 
man, is enough to make anybody trip over his mop, suds 
hissing along the floor and the bucket gong-crashing: in 
astonishment. In delight! 

Before long these two wretched delinquents are skulk- 
ing out to the edges of town to meet. It is a local scandal. 
Chu, from some recess within the filthy rags and shreds 
that hang from his unwholesome yellow body, produces | 
‘a repulsive black gob of the foul-smelling substance, — 
wrapped in a scrap torn from an old Enbek3i Qazaq for 
17 August of last year. Tchitcherine brings the pipe— 
being from the West he’s in charge of the technology of 
the thing a—charred, nasty little implement in red and 
yellow repetitions over Britannia metal, bought used for 
a handful of kopecks in the Lepers’ Quarter of Bukhara, 


In the Zone 405 


and yes, nicely broken in too by that time. Reckless Cap- 
tain Tchitcherine. The two opiomaniacs crouch behind a 
bit of wall wrecked and tilted from the last earthquake. 
Occasional riders pass by, some noting them and some 
not, but all in silence. Stars overhead crowd the sky. Far 
into the country, grasses blow, and the waves move on 
through, slow as sheep. It’s a mild wind, carrying the last 
smoke of the day, the odors of herds and jasmine, of 
standing water, settling dust . . . a wind. Tchitcherine 
will never remember. Any more than he can now connect 
this raw jumble of forty alkaloids with the cut, faceted, 
polished, and foiled molecules that salesman Wimpe 
showed him once upon a time, one by one, and told the 
histories of... . . 

“Oneirine, and Methoneirine. Variations reported by 
Laszlo Jamf in the ACS Journal, year before last. Jamf 


-was on loan again, this time as a chemist, to the Ameri- 


cans, whose National Research Council had begun a 
massive program to explore the morphine molecule and 
its possibilities—a Ten-Year Plan, coinciding, most oddly, 
with the classic study of large molecules being carried 
on by Carothers of du Pont, the Great Synthesist. Con- 
nection? Of course there’s one. But we don’t talk about 
it. NRC is synthesizing new molecules every day, most of 
them from pieces of the morphine molecule. Du Pont is 
stringing together groups such as amides into long chains. 
The two programs seem to be complementary, don’t they? 
The American vice of modular repetition, combined with 
what is perhaps our basic search: to find something that 
can kill intense pain without causing addiction. 

“Results have not been encouraging. We seem up 
against a dilemma built into Nature, much like the 
Heisenberg situation. There is nearly complete parallelism 
between analgesia and addiction. The more pain it takes 
away, the more we desire it. It appears we can’t have 
one property without the other, any more than a particle 
physicist can specify position without suffering an uncer- 
tainty as to the particle’s velocity—” 

“I could have told you that. But why—” 

“Why. My dear captain. Why?” 

“The money, Wimpe. To pour funds down the latrine 
on such a hopeless search—” 


406 Gravity's Ramnsow 


A man-to-man touch then on his buttoned epaulet. A 
middle-aged smile full of Weltschmerz. “Trade-off, 
Tchitcherine,” whispers the salesman. “A question of bal- 
ancing priorities. Research people come cheap enough, 
and even an IG may be allowed to dream, to hope against 
hope. . . . Think of what it would mean to find such a 
drug—to abolish pain rationally, without the extra cost of 
addiction. A surplus cost—surely there is something in 
Marx and Engels,” soothe the customer, “to cover this. 
A demand like ‘addiction,’ having nothing to do with real 
pain, real economic needs, unrelated to production or 
labor . . . we need fewer of these unknowns, not more. 
We know how to produce real pain. Wars, obviously . . . 
machines in the factories, industrial accidents, automobiles 
built to be unsafe, poisons in food, water, and even air— 
these are quantities tied directly to the economy. We 
know them, and we can control them. But ‘addiction’? 
What do we know of that? Fog and phantoms. No two 
experts will even agree on how to define the word. ‘Com- 
pulsion’P Who is not compelled? ‘Tolerance’? “Depen- 
dence’? What do they mean? All we have are the thousand 
dim, academic theories. A rational economy cannot de- 
pend on psychological quirks. We could not plan...” 

What premonition has begun to throb in Tchitcherine’s 
right knee? What direct conversion between pain and 
goldP 

“Are you really this evil, or is it just an actP Are you 
really trafficking in pain?” 

“Doctors traffick in pain and no one would dream of 
critizing their noble calling. Yet let the Verbindungsman 
but reach for the latch on his case, and you all start to 
scream and run. Well—you won’t find many addicts 
among us. The medical profession is full of them, but we 
salesmen believe in real pain, real deliverance—we are 
knights in the service of that Ideal. It must all be real, for 
‘the purposes of our market. Otherwise my employer—and 
our little chemical cartel is the model for the very struc- 
ture of nations—becomes lost in illusion and dream, and 
one day vanishes into chaos. Your own employer as well.” 

“My ‘employer’ is the Soviet State.” 

“Yes?” Wimpe did say “is the» model,” not “will be.” 
Surprising they could have got this far, if indeed they 


4 


Inthe Zone 407 


did—being of such different persuasions and all. Wimpe, 
however, being far: more cynical; would have been able to 
admit more-of the truth before starting to feel uncom- 
fortable. His patience with Tchitcherine’s Red Army ver- 
sion of economics may have been wide enough. They did 
part amiably. Wimpe was reassigned to the United States 
(Chemnyco of New York)» shortly after Hitler became 
Chancellor. Tchitcherine’s connection, according to the 
garrison gossip, ceased then, forever. 

But these are rumors. Their chronology can’t be trusted. 
Contradictions creep in. Perfect for passing a winter in 
Central Asia, if you happen not to be Tchitcherine. If you 
are Tchitcherine, though, well, that puts you in more of a 
peculiar position. Doesn’t it. You have to get through the 
winter on nothing but paranoid suspicions about why 
you're here.... 

It’s because of Enzian, it’s got to be damned Enzian. 
Tchitcherine has been to the Krasnyy Arkhiv, has seen the 
records, the diaries and logs from the epical, doomed 
voyage of Admiral Rozhdestvenski, some still classified 
even after 20 years. And now he knows. And if it’s all in 
the archives; then They know; too. Nubile young ladies 
and German dope salesmen are reason. enough to send a 
man east in any period of history. But They would not be 
who or where They are without a touch of Dante to Their 
notions of reprisal. Simple talion may be fine for wartime, 
but politics between wars demands symmetry and a more 
elegant idea of justice, even to the point of masquerading, 
a bit decadently, as mercy. It is more complicated than 
mass execution, more difficult and less satisfying, but there ~ 
are arrangements Tchitcherine can’t see, wide as Europe, 
perhaps as the world, that can’t be disturbed very much, 
between wars.... 

It seems that in December, 1904, Admiral Rozhdestven- 
ski, commanding a fleet of 42 Russian men-o’-war, steamed 
into the South-West African port of Liideritzbucht. This 
was at the height of the Russo-Japanese War. Rozhdest- 
venski was on route to the Pacific, to relieve the other 
Russian fleet, which had been bottled up for months in 


~ Port Arthur by the Japanese. Out of the Baltic, around 


Europe and Africa, bound across the whole Indian Ocean 


and then north along the final coast of Asia, it was to be 


408 Gravity’s RAaInBow 


among the most spectacular sea voyages of history: seven 
months and 18,000 mlies to an early summer day in the 
waters between Japan and Korea, where one Admiral 
Togo, who'd been lying in wait, would come sailing out 
from behind the island of Tsushima and before nightfall 
hand Rozhdestvenski’s ass to him. Only four Russian ships 
would make it in to Vladivostok—nearly all the rest would 
be sunk by the wily Jap. 

Tchitcherine’s father was a gunner on the Admiral’s 
flagship, the Suvorov. The fleet paused in Liideritzbucht 
for a week, trying to take on coal. Storms lashed through 
the crowded little harbor. The Suvorov kept smashing up 
against her colliers, tearing holes in the sides, wrecking 
many of her own 12-pound guns. Squalls blew in, clammy 
coal dust swirled and struck to everything, human and 
steel. Sailors worked around the clock, with searchlights 
set up on deck at night, hauling coal sacks, half blind in 
the glare, shoveling, sweating, coughing, bitching. Some 
went crazy, a few tried suicide. Old Tchitcherine, after 
two days of it, went AWOL, and stayed away till it was 
over. He found a Herero girl who’d lost her husband in 
the uprising against the Germans. It was nothing he had 
planned or even dreamed .about before going ashore. What 
did he know of Africa? He had a wife back in Saint Peters- 
burg, and a child hardly able to roll over. Up till then 
Kronstadt was the farthest he’d been from home. He only 
wanted a rest from the working parties, and from the way 
it looked ... from what the black and white of coal and 
arc-light were about to say...no color, and the unreality 
to go with it—but a familiar unreality, that warms This Is 
All Being Staged To See What I'll Do So I Mustn’t Make 
One Wrong Move...on the last day of his life, with 
Japanese iron whistling down on him from ships that are 
too far off in the haze for him even to’ see, he will think 
of the slowly carbonizing faces of men he thought he 
knew, men turing to coal, ancient coal that glistened, 
each crystal, in the hoarse sputter: of the Jablochkov 
candles, each flake struck perfect...a conspiracy of car- 
bon, though he never phrased it as “carbon,” it was 
power he walked away from, the feeling| of too much 
meaningless power, flowing wrong...he could smell 
Death in it. So he waited till the master-at-arms turned to 


. In the Zone 409 


_ light a cigarette, and then just walked away—they were 
all too black, artificially black, for it to be easily noticed— 
and found ashore the honest blackness of: the solemn 
Herero. girl, which seemed to him a breath of life after 
long confinement, and. stayed with her at the edge of the 
flat sorrowful little town, near the railroad, in a one-room 
house built. of saplings, packing-cases, reeds, mud. The 
rain blew.. The. trains cried and puffed. The man and 
woman stayed in bed and drank kari, which is brewed 
from potatoes, peas, and sugar, and in Herero means “the 
drink of death.” It was nearly Christmas, and he gave her 
a medal he had won in some gunnery exercise long ago in 
the Baltic. By the time he left, they had learned: each 
other’s names and a few words in the respective lan- 
guages—afraid, happy, sleep, love... the beginnings of a 
new tongue, a pidgin which they were perhaps the only 
two speakers of in the world. 

But he went back. His future was with the Baltic fleet, 
it was something neither he nor the girl questioned. The 
storm blew out, fog covered the sea. Tchitcherine steamed 
away, shut back down in a dark and stinking compartment 
below the Suvorov’s waterline, drinking his Christmas 
vodka and yarning about his good times in a space that 
didn’t rock, back at the edge of the dry veld with some- 
thing warm and kind around his penis besides his lonely 
fist. He was already describing her as a sultry native 
wench. It is the oldest sea story. As he told it he was no 
longer Tchitcherine, but a single-faced crowd before and 
after, all lost but not all unlucky. The girl may have stood 
on some promontory watching the gray ironclads dissolve 
one by one in the South Atlantic mist, but even if you'd 
like a few bars of Madame Butterfly about here, she was 
more probably out hustling, or asleep. She was not going 
to have an easy time. Tchitcherine had left her with a 
child, born a few months after the gunner went down in 
sight of the steep cliffs and green forests of Tsushima, early 
in the evening of 27 May. 

The Germans recorded the birth and the father’s name 
(he had written it down for her, as sailors do—he had 
given her his name) in their central files at Windhoek. A 
travel pass was issued for mother and child to return to her 
tribal village, shortly after. A census by the colonial gov- 


410 Graviry’s RaInsow 


ernment to see how many natives they'd killed, taken just 
after Enzian was returned by Bushmen to the same vil- 
lage, lists the mother as deceased, but her name is in the 
records. A visa dated December 1926 for Enzian to enter 
Germany, and later an application for German citizenship, 
are both on file in Berlin, 

It took no small amount of legwork to assemble all these 
pieces of paper. Tchitcherine had nothing to start with but 
a brief word or two in the Admiralty papers. But this was 
in the era of Feodora Alexandrevna, she of the kidskin 
underwear, and the access situation was a little better for 
Tchitcherine than it is now. The Rapallo Treaty was also 
in force, so there were any number of lines open’to Berlin. 
That weird piece of paper...in his moments of sickest 
personal grandeur it is quite clear to him how his own 
namesake and the murdered Jew put together an elabo- 
rate piece of theatre at Rapallo, and that the real and only 
purpose was to reveal to Vaslav Tchitcherine the existence 
of Enzian...the garrison life out east, like certain drugs, 
makes these things amazingly clear.... © 

But alas, seems like the obsessive is his own undoing. 
The dossier that Tchitcherine put together on Enzian (he'd 
even got to see what Soviet intelligence had on then 
Lieutenant Weissmann and his political adventures in Siid- 
west) was reproduced by some eager apparatchik and 
stashed in Tchitcherine’s own dossier. And so it transpired, 
no more than a month or two later, that somebody equally 
anonymous had cut Tchitcherine’s orders for Baku, and he 
was grimly off to attend the first plenary session of the 
VIsK NTA (Vesoynznyy Tsentral’nyy Komitet Novogo 
Tyurkskogo Alfavita), where he was promptly assigned to 
the 4 Committee. 

4 seems to be a kind of G, a voiced uvular plosive. The 
distinction between it and your ordinary G is one Tchi- 
tcherine will never learn to appreciate. Come to find out, 
all the Weird Letter Assignments have been reserved for 
ne’er-do-wells like himself. Shatsk, the notorious Leningrad 
nose-fetishist, who carries a black satin handkerchief to 
Party congresses and yes, more than once has been unable 
to refrain from reaching out and’ actually stroking the 
noses of powerful officials, is here—banished to the 6 Com- 
mittee, where he keeps forgetting that @ in the NTA, is 


In the Zone 411 


_@; not Russian F, thus retarding progress and sowing 
confusion at every working session. Most of his time is 
taken up with trying to hustle himself a transfer to the N 
Committee, “Or actually,” sidling closer, breathing heavily, 
“just a plain, N, or even an M, will, do....” The im- 
petuous and unstable practical joker Radnichny has pulled 
the 9 Committee, 9 being a schwa or neutral wh, where he 
has set out on a megalomaniac project to replace every 
spceken word vowel in Central Asia—and why stop there, 
why not even a consonant or two? with these schwas here 
.». not unusual considering his record of impersonations 
and dummy resolutions, and a brilliant but doomed con- 
spiracy to hit Stalin in the face with a grape chiffon pie, 
in which he was implicated only enough to get him Baku 
instead of worse. 

Naturally Tchitcherine gravitates into this crew of 
irredeemables. Before long, if it isn’t some scheme of 
Radnichny’s to infiltrate an oil-field and disguise a derrick 
as a giant penis, it’s lurking down in Arab quarters of the 
city, waiting with the infamous Ukrainian doper Bugnogor- 
kov of the glottal K Committee (ordinary K being repre- 
sented by Q, whereas C is pronounced with a sort of tch 
sound) for a hashish connection, or fending off the nasal 
advances of Shatsk. It occurs to him that he is, in reality, 
locked up in some military nut ward back in Moscow, and 
only hallucinating this plenary session. No one here seems 
quite right in the head. 

_. Most distressing of all is the power struggle he has 
somehow been suckered into with one Igor Blobadjian, a 

| party representative on the prestigious G Committee. 

| Blobadjian is fanatically attempting to steal 1s from 
Tchitcherine’s Committee, and change them to Gs, using 

 Joan-words as an entering wedge. In the sunlit, sweltering 
commissary the two men sneer at each other across trays 
of zapekanka and Georgian fruit soup. 

There is a crisis over which kind of g to use in the word 
“stenography.” There is a lot of emotional attachment to the 
word around here. Tchitcherine one morning finds all the 
pencils in his conference room have mysteriously vanished. 

In revenge, he and Radnichny sneak in Blobadjian’s con- 

_ ference room next night with hacksaws, files and torches, 

and reform the alphabet on his typewriter. It is some fun 


412 Gravity's Ramsow 


in the moming. Blobadjian runs around in a prolonged 
screaming fit. Tchitcherine’s in conference, meeting's 
called to order, CRASH! two dozen linguists and bureau- 
crats go toppling over on their ass. Noise echoes for a full 
two minutes. Tchitcherine, on his ass, notes that pieces of 
chair leg all around the table have been sawed off, re- 
attached with wax and varnished over again. A professional 
job, all right. Could Radnichny be a double agent? The 
time for lighthearted practical jokes is past. Tchitcherine 
must go it alone. Painstakingly, by midwatch lantern light, 
when the manipulations of letters are most apt to produce 
other kinds of illumination, Tchitcherine transliterates the 
opening sura of the holy Koran into the proposed NTA, 
and causes it to be circulated among the Arabists at the 
session, over the name of Igor Blobadjian. 
This is asking for trouble, all right. These Arabists are 
truly a frenzied bunch. They have been lobbying passion- 
ately for a New Turkic Alphabet made up of Arabic letters. 
There are fistfights in the hallways with unreconstructed 
Cyrillicists, and whispers of a campaign to boycott, 
throughout the Islamic world, any Latin alphabet. (Actu-— 
ally nobody is really too keen on a Cyrillic NTA. Old 
Czarist albatrosses still hang around the Soviet neck. 
There is strong native resistance in Central Asia these days 
to anything suggesting Russification, and that goes even 
for the look of a printed language. The objections to an 
Arabic alphabet have to do with the absence of vowel 
symbols, and no strict one-to-one relation between sounds 
and characters. So this has left Latin, by default. But the 
Arabists aren’t giving up. They keep proposing reformed 
Arabic scripts—mostly on the model of one ratified at 
Bukhara in 1923 and used successfully among the Uzbeks. 
Palatal and velar vocalics of spoken Kazakh can be got 
round by using diacritical marks.) And there is a strong 
religious angle in all this. Using a non-Arabic alphabet is 
felt to be a sin against God—most of the Turkic peoples 
are, after all, Islamic, and Arabic script is the script of 
Islam, it is the script in which the word of Allah came 
down on the Night of Power, the script of the Koran 
Of the what? Does Tchitcherine know! what he’s doing 
with this forgery of his? It is more than| blasphemy, it is 
an invitation to holy war. Blobadjian, accordingly, is pur- 


4 


In the Zone 413 


sued through the black end of Baku by a passel of scream- 
ing Arabists waving scimitars and grinning horribly. The. 
oil towers stand sentinel, bone-empty, in the dark. Hunch- 
backs, lepers, hebephrenics and amputees of all descrip- 
tions have come popping out of their secret spaces to 
watch the fun. They loll back against the rusting metal 
flanks of refinery hardware, their whole common sky in a 
tessellation of primary colors. They occupy the chambers 
and bins and pockets of administrative emptiness left after 
the Revolution, when the emissaries from Dutch Shell were 
asked to leave, and the English and Swedish engineers all 
went home. It is a period now in Baku of lull, of retrench- 
ment. All the oil money taken out of these fields by the 
Nobels has gone into Nobel Prizes. New wells are going 
down elsewhere, between the Volga and the Urals. Time 
for retrospection here, for refining the recent history that’s 
being pumped up fetid and black from other strata of 
Earth’s mind, .. 3» 

“In here, Blobadjian—quickly.” Close behind, Arabists 
are ululating, shrill, merciless, among the red-orange stars 
over the crowds of derricks. 

Slam. The last hatch is dogged. “Wait—what is this?” 

“Come. Time for your journey now.” 

“But I don’t want—”. 

“You don’t want to be another slaughtered infidel. Too 
late, Blobadjian. Here we go... .” 

The first thing he learns is how to vary his index of 
refraction. He can choose anything between transparent 
and opaque. After the thrill of experimenting has worn off, 
he settles on’a pale, banded onyx effect. 

“It suits you,” murmur his guides. “Now hurry.” 

“No. I want to pay Tchitcherine what he’s got coming.” 

“Too late. You're no part of what he’s got coming. Not 
any more.” 
~ “But he—” 

“He’s a blasphemer. Islam has its own machineries for 
that. Angels and sanctions, and careful interrogating. 
Leave him. He has a different way to go.” 

How alphabetic is the nature of molecules. One grows - 
aware of it down here: one finds Committees on molecular 
structure which are very similar to those back at the NTA 
plenary session. “See: how they are taken out from the 


414 Gravity’s RaInsow 


coarse flow—shaped, cleaned, rectified, just as you once 
redeemed your letters from the lawless, ‘the mortal stream- 
ing of human speech. ... These are our letters, our words: 
they too can be subcleilatands broken, recoupled, redefined, 

co-polymerized one to the other in worldwide chains that 
will surface now and then over long molecular sliences, 
like the seen parts of a tapestry.” 

Blobadjian comes to see that the New Turkic Alphabet 
is only one version of a process really much older—and 
less unaware of itself—than he has ever had cause to 
dream. By and by, the frantic competition between % and 
G has faded away to trivial childhood memories. Dim 
anecdotes. He has gone beyond—once a sour bureaucrat 
with an upper lip as clearly demarcated as a chimpanzee’s, 
now he is an adventurer, well off on a passage of his own, 
by underground current, without any anxiety over where 
it may be taking him. He has even lost, an indefinite dis- 
tance upstream, his pride in feeling once a little sorry for 
Vaslav Tchitcherine, destined never to. see the things 
Blobadjian is seeing: . 

And print just goes marching on without him. Copy boys 
go running down the rows of desks trailing smeared gal- 
leys in the air. Native printers get crash courses from ex- 
perts airlifted in from Tiflis on how to set up that NTA. 
Printed posters go up in the cities, in Samarkand. and 
Pishpek, Verney and Tashkent. On sidewalks and walls the 
very first printed slogans start to show up, the first Central 
Asian fuck you signs, the first kill-the-police-commissioner 
signs (and somebody does! this alphabet is really some- 
thing!) and so the’ magic that the shamans, out in the 
wind, have always known, begins to operate now in a 
political way, and Dzaqyp Qulan hears the ghost in his 
own lynched father we a scratchy pen in the night, prac- 
ticing As and Bs.. 


But right about now, here come Tchitcherine and ~ 
DzZaqyp Qulan riding up over some low hills and down into ~ 
the village they’ve been looking for. The people are gath- — 
ered in a circle: there’s been a feast all day. Fires are — 
smoldering. In the middle of the crowd a small space has ~ 
been cleared, and two young voices can be'heard even at ~ 
this distance. 


“$0 


In the Zone 415 


It is an ajtys—a singing-duel. The boy and girl stand in 
the eye of the village carrying on a mocking well - I - sort - of 
- like:- you - even - if - there’s - one - or - two - weird - things - 
about - you - for - instance—kind of game while the tune 
darts in and out of qobyz and dombra strummed and 
plucked. The people laugh at the good lines. You have 
to be on your toes for this: you trade four-line stanzas, 
first, second, and last lines all have to rhyme though the 
lines don’t have to be any special length, just breathable. 
Still, it’s tricky. It gets insulting too. There are villages 
where some partners haven’t spoken to each other for years 
after an ajtys. As Tchitcherine and DZzaqyp Qulan ride in, 
the girl is making fun of her opponent’s horse, who is just 
a little—nothing serious, but kind of heavy-set... well, 
fat, really. Really fat. And it’s getting to the kid. He's 
annoyed. He zips back a fast one about bringing all his 
friends around and demolishing her and her family too. 
Everybody sort of goes hmm. No laughs. She smiles, 
tightly, and sings: 3 


You’ve been drinking a lot of qumys, 

I must be hearing the words of qumys— 
For where were you the night my brother 
Came looking for his stolen qumys? 


Oh-oh. The brother she mentioned is laughing fit to 
bust. The kid singing is not so happy. 

“This could go on for a while.” Dzaqyp Qulan dis- 
mounts, and sets about straightening his knee joints. “That's 
him, over there.” 

A very old aqyn—a wandering Kazakh singer—sits with 
a cup of qumys, dozing near the fire. 

“Are you sure he’ll—” 

“Hell sing about it. He’s ridden right through that 
country. He’d betray his profession if he didn’t.” 

They sit down and are passed cups of the fermented 
mare’s milk, with a bit of lamb, lepeshka, a few straw- 
berries.... The boy and girl go on battling with their 
voices—and Tchitcherine understands, abruptly, that soon 
someone will come out and begin to write some of these 
down in the New Turkic Alphabet he helped frame... 
and this is how they will be lost. 


416 Gravity's RAINBOW 
Now and then he glances over at the old aqyn, who only q 


appears to be sleeping. In fact he radiates for the singers — 


a sort of guidance. It is kindness, It can be felt as un- 
mistakably as the heat from the embers. 

Slowly, turn by tum, the couple’s insults get gentler, 
funnier. What might have been a village apocalypse has 
gone on now into comic cooperation, as between a pair of 
vaudeville comedians. They are out of themselves, playing 
it all for the listeners to enjoy. The girl has the last word. 


Did I hear you mention a marriage? 
Here there has been a marriage— 
This warm circle of song, 

Boisterous, loud as any marriage... . 


And I like you, even if there are one or two things— 
For a little while the feast gathers momentum. Drunks 
holler and women talk, and the little kids totter in and out 
of the huts, and the wind has picked up some speed. Then 
the wandering singer begins to tune his dombra, and the 
Asian silence comes back. 

“Are you going to get it all?” asks Dzaqyp Qulan. 

“In stenography,” replies Tchitcherine, his g a little 
glottal. 


Tue Aoyrn’s SONG 


I have come from the edge of the world. 
I have come from the lungs of the wind, 
With a thing I have seen so awesome 
Even Dzambul could not sing it. 

With a fear in my heart so sharp 

It will cut the strongest of metals, 


In the ancient tales it is told 

In a time that is older than Qorqyt, 

Who took from the wood of Syrghaj 

The first qobyz, and the first song— | 
It is told that a land far distant 

Is the place of the Kirghiz Light. =| 


In a place where words are unknown, 
And eyes shine like candles at night, 


In the Zone 417 


And the face of God is a presence 
Behind the mask of the sky— 

At the tall black rock in. the desert, 
In the time of the final days. 


If the place were not so distant, 

If words were known, and spoken, 
Then the God might be a gold ikon, 
Or a page in a paper book. 

But It comes as the Kirghiz Light— 
There is no other way to know It. 


The roar of Its voice is deafness, 
The flash of Its light is blindness. 
The floor of the desert rumbles, 
And Its face cannot be borne. 
And a man cannot be the same, 
After seeing the Kirghiz Light. 


For I tell you that I have seen It 

In aplace which is older than darkness, 
Where even Allah cannot reach. 

As you see, my beard is an ice-field, 

I walk with a stick to support me, 

_ But this light must change us:to children. 


And now I cannot walk far, 

For a baby must learn to walk. 

And my words are reaching your ears 
As the meaningless sounds of a baby. 
For the Kirghiz Light took my eyes, 
Now I sense all Earth like a baby. 


It is north, for a six-day ride, 

Through the steep and death-gray canyons, 
Then across the stony desert 

To, the mountain whose peak is a white dzurt. 
And if you have passed without danger, 
The place of the black rock will find you. 


But if you would not be born, 

Then stay with your warm red fire, 

And stay with your wife, in your tent, 
And the Light will never find you, 

And your heart will grow heavy 'with age, 
And your eyes will shut only to sleep. 


418 Gravity's Rainsow 


“Got it,” sez Tchitcherine. “Let’s ride, comrade.” Off 
again, the fires dying at their backs, the sounds of string 
music, of village carousing, presently swallowed behind 
the wind. 

And on into the canyons. Far away to the north, a white 
mountaintop winks in the last sunlight. Down here, it is 
already shadowed evening. 

Tchitcherine will reach the Kirghiz Light, but not his 
birth. He is no aqyn, and his heart was never ready. He 
will see It just before dawn, He will spend 12 hours then, 
face-up on the desert, a prehistoric city greater than 
Babylon lying in stifled mineral sleep. a kilometer below 
his back, as the shadow of the tall rock, rising to a point, 
dances west to east and Dzaqyp Qulan tends him, anxious 
as child and doll, and drying foam laces the necks of the 
two horses, But someday, like the mountains, like the 
young exiled women in their certain love, in their inno- 
cence of him, like the morning earthquakes and the cloud- 
driving wind, a purge, a war, and millions after millions of 
souls gone behind him, he will hardly be able to remember 
It. 

But in the Zone, hidden inside the summer Zone, the 
Rocket is waiting. He will be drawn the same way 
again.... 


| 


Last week, in the British sector someplace, Slothrop, hav- 
ing been asshole enough to drink out of an ornamental 
pond in the Tiergarten, took sick. Any Berliner these days 
knows enough to boil water before drinking, though some 
then proceed to brew it with various things for tea, such 
as tulip bulbs, which is not good. Word is out that the 
center of the bulb is deadly poison. But they keep doing 
it. Once Slothrop—or Rocketman, as he is soon to be 
known—thought he might warn them about things like 
tulip bulbs, Bring in a little American enlightenment. But 
he gets so desperate with them, moving behind their 
scrims of European pain: he keeps pushing aside gauze — 
_ after. wavy em but there’s ghee still one, the im- 

penetrable. . uo bat . 


In the Zone 419 


So there he is, under the trees in summer leaf, in flower, 
many of them blasted horizontal or into chips and splin- 
ters—fine dust from the bridle paths rising in the sunrays 
by itself, ghosts of horses still taking their early-morning 
turns through the peacetime park. Up all night and thirsty, 
Slothrop lies on his stomach and slurps up water, just an 
old saddle tramp at the water hole here. ... Fool. Vomit- 
ing, cramps, diarrhea, and who’s he to lecture about tulip 
bulbs? He manages to crawl as far as an empty cellar, across 
the street from a wrecked church, curls up and spends the 
next days feverish, shivering, oozing shit that burns like 
acid—lost, alone with that sovereign Nazi movie-villain 
fist clamping in his bowels ja—you vill shit now, ja? 
Wondering if hell ever see Berkshire again. Mommy, 
Mommy! The War's over; why can’t I go home now? 
Nalline, the reflection from her Gold Star brightening her 
chins like a buttercup, smirks by the window and. won't 
answer. ... 

A terrible time, Hallucinating Rolls Royces and boot- 
heels in the night; coming to get him. Out in the street 
women in babushkas are lackadaisically digging trenches 
for the black iron water pipe that’s stacked along the curb- 
side. All day long they talk, shift after shift, into evening. 
Slothrop lies in the space where sunlight visits his cellar 
for half an hour before going on to others with mean pud- 
dles of warmth—sorry, got to go now, schedule to keep, 
see you tomorrow if it doesn’t rain, heh heh.... 

Once Slothrop wakes to the sound of an American work 
detail marching down the street, cadence being counted 
by a Negro voice—yo lep, yo lep, yo lep O right O lep 
... kind of little German folk tune with some sliding up- 
scale on the word “right’”—-Slothrop can imagine his man- 
nered jog of arm and head to the left as he comes down 
hard on that heel, the way they teach it in Basic...can 
see the man’s smile. For a minute he has the truly un- 
balanced idea of running out in the street and asking 
them to take him back, requesting political asylum in 
‘America. But he’s too weak. In his stomach, in his heart. 
He lies, listening the tramping and the voice out of ear- 


_ shot, the sound of his country fading away.... Fading 
like the WASP ghosts, the old-time DPs trailing rootless 


‘ 


\ 


4 


now down the roads out of his memory, crowding the 


NY 
; 


Woe 


420 Graviry’s Rainsow 


rooftops of the freights of forgetfulness, knapsacks and 
poor refugee pockets stuffed with tracts nobody’d read, 
looking for another host: given up for good on Rocketman 
here. Somewhere between the burning in his head and 
the burning in his asshole, if the two can be conveniently 
separated, and paced to that dying cadence, he elaborates 
a fantasy in which Enzian, the African, finds him again— 
comes to offer him a way out. 

Because it seems a while back that they did meet again, 
by the reedy edge of a marsh south of the capital. Un- 
shaven, sweating, stinking Rocketman restlessly tripping 
out to the suburbs, among his people: there is haze over 
the sun, and a rotting swamp odor worse than Slothrop’s 
own. Only two or three hours’ sleep in the last couple of 
days. He stumbles on the Schwarzkommando, busy dredg- 
ing for pieces of rocket. Formations of dark birds are 
cruising in the sky. The Africans have a partisan look: 
pieces here and there of old Wehrmacht and SS uniform, 
tattered civilian clothes, only one insigne in common, worn 
wherever it will show, a painted steel device in red, white 
and blue, thus: 


ve) 


Zz 


Adapted from insignia the German troopers. wore. in 
South-West Africa when they camé in 1904 to crush the 
Herero Rebellion—it was uséd to pin up half the brim of 
a wide-awake hat. For the Zone-Hereros.it has become 
something deep, Slothrop gathers, maybe a little mystical. — 
Though he recognizes the letters—Klar, Entliiftung, Ziind- 
ung, Vorstufe, Haupstufe, the five positions of the launch- 
ing switch in the A4 control car—he doesn’t let on to — 
They sit on a hillside eating bread and sausages. Chil- 
dren from the town move by in every direction. Someone 
has set up an army tent, someone has brought beer in 
kegs. A scratch band, a dozen brasses in tasseled, frayed — 
gold and red uniforms play selections from Die Meister- 
singer. Fat-smoke drifts in the air. Choruses of drinkers in — 
the distance break from time to time into laughter or a © 
song. It’s a Rocket-raising: a festival new to this country. — 
Soon it will come to the folk-attention how close Wernher 


In the Zone 421 


von Braun’s birthday is to the Spring Equinox, and the 
same German impulse that once rolled flower-boats through 
the towns and staged mock battles between young Spring 
and deathwhite old Winter will be erecting strange floral 
towers out in the clearings and meadows, and the young 
scientist-surrogate will be going round and round with old 
Gravity or some such buffoon, and the children will be 
tickled, and laugh.... 
Schwarzkommando struggle knee-deep in mud, engaged 
_ entirely with the salvage, with the moment. The A4 they’re 
about to uncover was used in the last desperate battle for 
Berlin—an abortive firing, a warhead that didn’t explode. 
Around its grave they're driving in planks for shoring, 
sending back mud in buckets and wood casks along a 
human chain to be dumped on shore, near where their 
rifles and kits are stacked. 

“So Marvy was right. They didn’t disarm you guys.” 

“They didn’t: know where to find us. We were a sur-— 
prise. There are even now powerful factions in Paris who 
don’t believe we exist. ‘had most of the time I'm not. so 
sure myself.” 

“How’s thatP” - 

“Well, I think we're here, but only in a statistical way. 
Something like that rock over there is just about 100% 
certain—it knows it’s there, so does everybody else. But 
our own chances of being right here right now are only a 
little better than even—the slightest shift in the probabil- 
ities and we're gone—schnapp! like that.” 

“Peculiar talk, Oberst.” 

“Not if you've been where we have. Forty years ago, in 
Siidwest, we were nearly exterminated. There was no rea- 
son. Can you understand thatP No reason. We couldn't 
even find comfort in the Will of God Theory. These were 
Germans with names and service records, men in blue 
uniforms who killed clumsily and not without guilt. 
Search-and-destroy missions, every day. It went on for 
two years. The orders came down from a human being, a 
scrupulous butcher named von Trotha, The thumb of 
mercy never touched his scales. 

“We have a word that we whisper, a mantra for times 
that threaten to be bad. Mba-kayere. You may find that it 
will work for you. Mba-kayere. It means ‘I am passed 
over.’ To those of us who survived von Trotha, it also 


422 Gravity’s Rainsow 


means that we have learned to stand outside our history 
and watch it, without feeling too much. A little schizoid. 
A sense for the statistics of our being. One reason we 
grew so close to the Rocket, I think, was this sharp aware- 
ness of how contingent, like ourselves, the Ropers 4 
could be—how at the mercy of small things... dust that 
gets in a timer and breaks electrical contact...a film of 
grease you can’t even see, oil from a touch of human 
fingers, left inside a liquid-oxygen valve, flaring up soon 
as the stuff hits and setting the whole thing off—-Ive seen 
that happen... rain that swells the bushings in the servos 
or leaks into a switch: corrosion, a short, a signal grounded 
out, Brennschluss too soon, and what was alive is only an 
Aggregat again, an Aggregat of pieces of dead matter, no 
longer anything that can move, or that has a Destiny with 
a shape—stop doing that with your eyebrows, Scufiling. I 
may have gone a bit native out here, that’s all. Stay in the 
Zone long enough and youll start getting ideas. about 
Destiny yourse 

A cry from downidn the marsh. Birds swirl upward, 
round and black, grains of coarse-cut pepper on this bouilla- 
baisse sky. Little kids come skidding to a halt, and the 
brass band fall silent in mid-bar. Enzian is on his feet and 
loping down to where the others are gathering. ~~. 

“Was ist los, meinen Sumpfmenschen?” The others, 
laughing, scoop up fistfuls of mud and start throwing them 
at their Nguarorerue, who ducks, dodges, grabs him some 
of that mud and starts flinging it back. The Germans on 
shore stand blinking, politely aghast at this lack of disci- 
pline. 

Down in the plank enclosure, a couple of muddy trim- 
tabs poke up now out of the marsh, with twelve feet of 
mud between them. Enzian, spattered and dripping, his 
white grin preceding him by several meters, vaults over 
the shoring and into the hole, and grabs a shovel. The 
moment has become roughly ceremonial: Andreas and 
Christian have moved up to either side to help him scrape 
and dig till about a foot of one fin-surface is exposed. The 
Determination of the Number. The Nguarorerue crouches — 
and. brushes away mud, revealing ipark of | Le secesion ao 
white 2, and a 7. 

“Outase.” And glum faces on the fiaae ; 

‘Slothrop’s got a hunch. “You expected der Fénffachnull- | , 


“In the Zone 423 


punkt,” he proposes to Enzian a little later, “the quintuple 
zero, right? Haa-aaah!” Gotcha, gotcha— 

Throwing up his hands, “It’s insane. I’ don’t wept 
there is one.” 

“Zero probability?” 

“T think it will depend on the garbivet of searchers. Are 
your people after it?” 

“I don’t know. I nie heard by accident: I don’t have 
any people.” 

“Schwarzgerat, Selliurskointwando. Scuffling: suppose 
somewhere there were an alphabetical list, someone’s list, 
an input to some intelligence arm, say. Some country, 
doesn’t matter. But suppose that on- this list, the two 
names, Blackinstrument, Blackcommand, just happened to 
be there, juxtaposed. 'That’s all, an alphabetical : coinci- 
dence. We wouldn’t have to be real, and neither would it, 
correct?” 

The tnarsbis streak away, patched with light under the 
calle overcast. Negative shadows flicker white behind the 
edges of everything. “Well, this is all creepy enough here, 

- Oberst,” sez Slothrop. “You're not helping.” 

Enzian is staring into Slothrop’s face, with something 
like a smile under his beard. 

““O.K. Who is after it, then?” Being enigmatic, won't 
answer—is this bird looking to be needled? “That Major 
Marvy,” opines Slothrop, “a-and that Tchitcherine, too!” 

Hal That did it. Like a salute, a boot-click, Enzian’s 
face snaps into perfect neutrality. “You would oblige me,” 
he begins, then settles for changing the subject.. “You 
were down in the Mittelwerke. How did Marvy’s people 
seem to be getting along with the Russians?” 

“Ace buddies, seemed like.” 

_“T have the feeling that the occupying Powers have just 
about reached agreement on a popular front against the 
Schwarzkommando, I don’t know who you are, or how 
your lines are drawn. But they're trying to shut us down. 
I'm just back from Hamburg. We had trouble, It was 
made to look like a DP raid, but the British military gov- 
ernment was behind it; and they had Russian cooperation.” 

- “Tm sorry. Can I help?” 
“Don’t be reckless.’ Let’s all wait and see. All anyone > 
knows about you is that you keep showing up.” 

Toward dusk, the black birds descend, millions of them, 


424 Gravity's RAINBOW — 


to sit in the branches of trees nearby, The trees grow 
heavy with black birds, branches like dendrites of the 
Nervous System fattening, deep in twittering nerve-dusk, in 
preparation for some important message... . 

Later in Berlin, down in the cellar among fever-dreams 
with shit leaking out of him at gallons per hour, too weak 
to aim more than token kicks at the rats running by with 
eyes fixed earmestly noplace, trying to make believe they 
don’t have a newer and dearer status among the Berliners, 
at minimum points on his mental health chart, when the 
sun is gone so totally it might as well be for good, Slo- 
throp’s dumb idling heart sez: The Schwarzgerat is no 
Grail, Ace, that’s not what the G in Imipolex G stands for. 
And you are no knightly hero. The best you can compare 
with is Tannhiuser, the Singing Nincompoop—you’ve been 
under one mountain at Nordhausen, been known to sing 
a song or two with uke accompaniment, and don’tcha feel 
you're in a sucking marshland of sin out here, Slothrop? 
maybe not the same thing William Slothrop, vomiting a 
good part of 1630 away over the side of that Arbella, 
meant when he said “sin.” ... But what you’ve done is put 
yourself on somebody’s else’s voyage—some Frau Holda, 
some Venus in some mountain—playing her, its, game:.. 
you know that in some irreducible way it’s an evil game. 
You play because you have nothing better to do, but that 
doesn’t make it right. And where is the Pope whose staff’s 
gonna bloom for you? . 

As a matterof fact, he is also just about to run into his 
Lisaura: someone he will be with for a while and then 
leave again. The Minnesinger abandoned his poor woman 
to suicide. What Slothrop will be leaving Greta Erdmann 
to is not so clear. Along the Havel in Neubabelsberg she 
waits, less than the images of herself that survive in an 
indeterminate number of release prints here and there 
about the Zone, and even across the sea.... Every kind 
technician who ever threw a magenta gel across her key 
light for her has gone to war or death, jand she is left 
nothing but God’s indifferent sunlight in all its bleaching 
and terror.... Eyebrows plucked to pen-strokes, long 
hair streaked with gray, hands heavy with rings of all 
colors, opacities and uglinesses, wearing her dark prewar 
Chanel suits, no hat, scarves, always a flower, she is” 


In the Zone 425 


haunted by Central European night-whispers that blow, 


like the skin curtains of Berlin, more ghostly around her 
arpa wrecked beauty the closer she and Slothrop 
draw. . 

This i is how they meet. One night Slothrop is out raid- 


_ ing a vegetable garden in the park. Thousands of people 


living in the open. He skirts their fires, stealthy— All he 
wants is a handful of greens here, a carrot or mangel- 
wurzel there, just to keep him going. When they see him 


. they throw rocks, lumber, once not long ago an old hand- 


grenade that didn’t go off but made him shit where he 
stood. — 

This evening he is orbiting someplace near the Grosser 
Stern. It is long after curfew. Odors of woodsmoke and 


decay hang over the city. Among pulverized heads of 


stone margraves and electors, reconnoitering a likely- 
looking cabbage patch, all of a sudden Slothrop picks up 
the scent of an unmistakable no it can’t be yes it is it’s a 
REEFER! A-and it’s burning someplace close by. Gold- 
shot green of the Rif’s slant fields here, vapor-blossoms 
resinous and summery, charm his snoot on through bushes 
and matted grass, under the blasted trees and whatever 
sits in their branches. 

Sure enough, in the hollow of an upended trunk, long 
roots fringing the scene like a leprechaun outpost, Slo- 
throp finds one Emil (“Saéure”) Bummer, once the Weimar 
Republic’s most notorious cat burglar and doper, flanked 
by two beautiful girls, handing around a cheerful little 
orange star. The depraved old man. Slothrop’s on top 
of them before they notice. Bummer smiles, reaches up 
an arm, offering the remainder of what they’ve been 
smoking to Slothrop, who receives it in long dirty finger- 
nails. Oboy. He hunkers down. 

“Was ist losP” sez Séure. “We've had a windfall of kif. 
Allah has smiled on us, well actually he was smiling at 
everybody, we just happened to be in his direct line of 
si .” His nickname, which means “acid” in German, 
developed back in the twenties, when he was carrying 


around a little bottle of schnapps which, if he got in a 
_ tight spot, he would bluff people into thinking was fuming 


nitric acid. He comes out now with another fat Moroccan 


reefer. They light up off of Slothrop’s faithful Zippo. 


426 Gravity’s RaINnBow 


Trudi, the blonde, and Magda, the sultry Bavarian, 
have spent the day looting a stash of Wagnerian opera 
costumes. There is a pointed helmet with horns, a full 
cape of green velvet, a pair of buckskin trousers. 

' “Saaaay,” sez Slothrop, “that rig looks pretty sharp!” 
ny re for you,” Magda smiles 
Ain ~ sch no. You'd get a better deal at the Tausch- 
zentrale. . 

But Séure insists. “Haven’t you ever noticed, when 
you're this Blitzed and you want somebody to show up, 
they always do?” 

The girls are moving the coal of the reefer about, 
watching its reflection in the shiny helmet changing 
shapes, depths, grades of color . . . hmm. It occurs to 
Slothrop here that without those horns on it, why this 
helmet would look just like the nose assembly of the 
Rocket. And if he could find a few triangular scraps of 


leather, figure a way to sew them on to Tchitcherine’s - 


boots . . . yeah, a-and on the back of the cape put a big, 
scarlet, capital R— It is as pregnant a moment as when 
Tonto, after the legendary ambush, attempts to— 

“Raketemensch!” screams Sdure, grabbing the helmet 
and unscrewing the horns off of it. Names by themselves 
may be empty, but the act of naming. . 


“You had the same idea?” Oh, strange. ‘Sure carefully — 


reaches up and places the helmet’ on Slothrop’s head. 
Ceremonially the girls drape the cape around his shoul- 
ders. Troll scouting parties have already sent runners 
back to inform their people. 

“Good. Now listen, Rocketman, I’m in a bit of trouble.” — 


“Hah?” Slothrop has been imagining a full-scale Rocket- — 


man Hype, in which the people bring him food, wine 


and maidens in a four-color dispensation in which there — 
is a lot of skipping and singing “La, la, la, la,” and beef- © 
steaks blossoming from these strafed lindens, and roast — 


turkeys thudding down like soft hail on Berlin, sweet — 


potatoes a-and melted marshmallows, etl ebitg up out of - 
the ground. . 
“Do you have any armies?” Trudi wants to know. Slo- 
throp, or Rocketman, hands over half a she pack. . 9 
and stabs — 


The reefer keeps coming around: | 
through this root shelter. Everybody forgets what it is 


_In the Zone 427 


they’ve been talking about. There’s the smell of earth. 
Bugs rush through, aerating. Magda has lit one of Slo- 
throp’s cigarettes for him and he tastes raspberry lipstick. 
Lipstick? Who’s got lipstick these days? What are all these 
people here into, anyway? 

Berlin is dark enough for stars, the accustomed stars 
but never so clearly arranged. It is possible also to make 
up your own. constellations. “Oh,” Sdure recalls. “I had. 
this problem...” 

“Tm really hungry,” it occurs to Slothrop. 

Trudi is telling Magda about her boy friend Gustav, 
who wants to live inside the piano. “All you could see 
was his feet sticking out, he kept saying, ‘You all hate 
me, you hate this piane!’” They’re giggling now. 

“Plucking on the strings,” sez Magda, “right? He’s so 
paranoid.” 

Trudi has these big, blonde Prussian legs, Tiny blonde 
hairs dance up and down in the starlight, up under her 
skirt and back, all through the shadows of her knees, 
around under the hollows behind them, this starry jitter- 
ing.... The stump towers above and cups them all, a 
giant nerve cell, dendrites extended into the city, the 
night. Signals coming in from all directions, and from back 
in time too, probably, if not indeed forward.... 

Saure, who is never able entirely to lay off business, 
rolls, flows to his feet, clutching on to a root till his head 
decides where it is going to come to rest. Magda, her ear 
at its entrance, is banging on Rocketman’s helmet with a 
stick. It gongs in chords. The separate notes aren’t right 
on pitch, either: they sound very odd together. ... 

“I don’t know what time it is,” Saure Bummer gazing 
around. “Weren’t we supposed to be at the Chicago Bar? 


’ Or was that last night?” 


“I forget,” Trudi giggles. 
“Listen, Kerl, I really have to talk to that American.” 
“Dear Emil,” Trudi whispers, “don’t worry. He'll be at 
the Chicago.” 
They decide on an intricate system of disguise. Saure 


gives Slothrop his jacket. Trudi wears the green cape. 


Magda puts on Slothrop’s boots, and he goes in his socks, 


| carrying her own tiny shoes in his pockets. They spend 


some time gathering plausible items, kindling and greens, 


ya 


428 Gravity’s Rainsow 


to fill the helmet with, and Saure carries that. Magda and 
Trudi help stuff Slothrop into the buckskin pants, both 
girls down on pretty knees, hands caressing his legs and 
ass. Like the ballroom in St. Patrick’s Cathedral, there is 
none in these trousers here, and sehaehanis's hardon, en- 
larging, aches like thunder. 

“Fine for you folks.” The girls are laughing. Grandiose 
Slothrop limps along after everybody, a network of clear 
interweaving ripples now like rain all through his vision, 
hands turning to stone, out of the Tiergarten, past shell- 
struck lime and chestnut trees, into the streets, or what is 
serving for them. Patrols of all nations keep coming by, 
and this mindless quartet have to hit the dirt often, trying 
not to laugh too much. Slothrop’s sox are sodden with dew. 
Tanks manoeuvre in the street, chewing parallel ridges of 
asphalt and stonedust. Trolls and dryads play in the open 


spaces. They were blasted back in May out of bridges, 


out of trees into liberation, and are now long citified. “Oh, 
that drip,” say the subdeb trolls about those who are not 
as hep, “he just isn’t out-of-the-tree about anything.” 
Mutilated statues lie under mineral sedation; frock-coated 
marble torsos of bureaucrats fallen pale in the gutters. Yes, 
hmm, here we are in the heart of downtown ‘Berlin, really, 
uh, a little, Jesus Christ what’s that— 


“Better watch it,” advises Sdure, “it’s kind of rubbery 


through here.” 

“What is that?” 

Well, what it is—isP what’s “is”P—is that King Kong, or 
some creature closely allied, squatting down, evidently 
just, taking a shit, right in the street! and everything! 
a-and being ignored, by truckload after truckload of 
Russian enlisted men in pisscutter caps and dazed 
smiles, grinding right on by—‘“Hey!” Slothrop wants 
to shout, “hey lookit that giant ape! or whatever it 
is. You guys? Hey...” But he doesn’t, luckily. On closer 
inspection, the crouching monster turns out to be the 
Reichstag building, shelled out, airbrushed, fire-brushed 


powdery black on all blastward curves and projections, 


chalked over its hard-echoing carbon insides with Cyrillic 
initials, and many names of comrades killed in May. 
Berlin proves to be full of these tricks. There’s a big 


i 


In the Zone 429 


_ chromo of Stalin that Slothrop could swear is a girl he 
| used to date at Harvard, the mustache and hair only in- 
cidental as makeup, damn if that isn’t what’s her name... 
| but before he can quite hear the gibbering score of little 
_ voices—hurry, hurry, get it in place, he’s almost around 
_ the corner—here, laid side by side on the pavement, are 
these. enormous loaves of bread dough left to rise under 
_. clean white cloths—boy, is everybody hungry: the same 
| thought hits them all at once, wow! Raw dough! loaves of 
bread for that monster back there...oh, no that’s right, 
| that was a building, the Reichstag, so these aren’t bread 
_... by now it’s clear that they're human bodies, dug from 
beneath today’s rubble, each inside its carefully tagged 
GI fartsack. But it was more than an optical mistake. They 
are rising, they are transubstantiated, and who knows, with 
summer over and hungry winter coming down, what we'll 
be feeding on by Xmas? 

What the notorious Femina is to cigarette-jobbing circles 
in Berlin, the Chicago is to dopers. But while dealing at 
the Femina usually gets under way around noon, the 
Chicago here only starts jiving after the 10:00 curfew. 
Slothrop, Sdéure, Trudi and Magda come in a back en- 
trance, out of a great massif of ruins and darkness lit only 
here and there, like the open country. Inside, M.O.s and 
corpsmen run hither and thither clutching bottles of fluffy 
white crystalline substances, small pink pills, clear am- 
poules the size of pureys. Occupation and Reichsmarks 
ruffle and flap across the room. Some dealers are all 
chemical enthusiasm, others all business. Oversize photos 
of John Dillinger, alone or posed with his mother, his pals, 
his tommygun, decorate the walls. Lights and arguing are 
kept low, should the military police happen by. 

On a wire-backed chair, blunt hair hands picking quietly 
at a guitar, sits an American sailor with an orangutan look 
to him. In 3/4 time and shit-kicking style, he is singing: 


caper 


ETI 


THE Dorper’ s DREAM 


Last night I dreamed I was plugged right in 
To a bubblin’ hookah so high, 

When all of a sudden some Arab jinni 

Jump up just a-winkin’ his eye. 

“I’m here to obey all your ishee.” he told me, 


eos ee 


430 Gravity's Rainsow 


As for words I was trying to grope. 
“Good buddy,” I cried, “you could surely oblige me 
By turnin’ me on to some dope!” 
With a bigfat smile he took ahold of my hand, 
And we flew down the sky in a flash, 
And the first thing I saw in the land where he took me 
Was a whole solid mountain of hash! 
All the trees was a-bloomin’ with pink ’n’ purple pills, 
Whur the Romilar River flowed by, 
To the magic mushrooms as wild as a riot 
So pretty that I wanted to cry. 
All the girls come to greet us, so sweet in slow motion, 
Morning glories woven into their hair, 
Bringin’ great big handfuls of snowy cocaine, 
All their dope they were eager to share. 
Well we dallied for days, just a-ballin’ and smokin’, 
In the flowering Panama Red, 
Just piggin’ on peyote ‘and nutmeg tea, © 
And those brownies so kind to your head. 
Now I could’ve passed that good time forever, 
And I really was fixing to stay, 
But you know that , 
jinni turned out, t’be a narco man, 
And he busted me right whur I lay. 
And he took me back, to,this cold, cold world, 
’N’ now m7 prison’s whurever I be . 
And I dream of the days back in Doperland 
And I wonder, will I ever go free? 


The singer is Seaman Bodine, of the U.S. destroyer 
John E. Badass, and he’s the contact Sdure is here to see. 
The Badass is docked in Cuxhaven and Bodine is semi- 
AWOL, having hit Berlin night before last for the first ~ 
time since the early weeks of American occupation. “Things — 
are so tight, man,” he’s groaning, “Potsdam, I couldn't 
believe it over there. Remember how the Wilhelmplatz _ 
used to be? ‘Watches, wine, jewels, cameras, heroin, fur — 
coats, everything, in the world, Nobody gave a shit, right? — 
You ought to see it now. Russian security all over the — 
place. Big mean customers: You couldn’t get near it.” 4 

“Isn’t there supposed to be something going on over — 
there?” sez Slothrop. He’s heard scuttlebutt, “A conference — 
or some shit?” y 

“They're deciding how to cut up pone sez Sdure. — 
“All the Powers. They should call in’ the Germans, a ‘ 
we've been doing that for centuries.” 


In the Zone 431 


“You couldn’t get a gnat in there now, man,” Seaman 
Bodine shaking his head, dexterously rolling a reefer one- 
handed on a cigarette paper he has first torn, with straight- 
faced bravura, in half. 

“Ah,” smiles Saéure, flinging an arm over Slothrop, “but 
what if Rocketman can?” 

Bodine looks over, skeptical, “That’s Rocketman?” 

“More or less,” sez Slothrop, “but I’m not sure I want 
to go into that Potsdam, right now... .” 

“If you only knew!” cries Bodine. “Listen, Ace, right 
this minute, hardly 15 miles away, there is six kilos! of 
pure, top-grade Nepalese hashish! Scored it from .my 
buddy in the CBI, government seals ’n’ everything, buried 
it myself back in May, so safe nobody'll ever find it with- 
out a map. All you got to. do is fly over there or whatever 
it is you do, just go in and get it.” 

eLuats ol 

“A kilo for you,” offers Saure. 

“They can cremate it with me. All those Russians can 
stand around the furnace and get loaded.” 

“Perhaps,” the most decadent young woman Slothrop 
has ever seen in his life, wearing fluorescent indigo eye- 
shadow and a black leather snood, comes slithering past, 
“the pretty American is not a devotee of the Green Hershey 
Bar, mm? ha-ha-ha... .” 

“A million marks,” Sdure sighs. 

“Where are you going to get—” 

Holding up an elfin finger, leaning close, “I print it.” 

Sure enough, he does. They all troop out of the Chicago, 
half a mile down through rubble piles, over pathways 
twisting invisible in the dark to all but Sadure, down at 
last in a houseless cellar with filing cabinets, a bed, an 
oil-lamp, a printing-press. Magda cuddles close to Slothrop, 
her hands dancing over his erection. Trudi has formed an 
inexplicable attachment to Bodine. Saure begins to crank 
his clattering wheel, and sheets of Reichsmarks do indeed 
come fluttering off into the holder, thousands on thousands. 
“All authentic plates and paper, too, The only detail 

missing is a slight ripple along the margins. There was a 
_ special stamp-press nobody managed to loot.” 

' “Uh,” Slothrop sez. 

“Aw, come on,” sez Bodine. “Rocketman, jeepers. You 
_ don’t want to do nothing no more.” 


432 Gravirty’s Ramnsow 


They help jog and square the sheets while Saure chops 
them up with a long glittering cutter blade. Holding out a 
fat roll of 100s, “You could be back tomorrow. No job is 
too tough for the Rocketman.” 

A day or two later, it will occur to Slothrop that what 
he should have said at that point’ was, “But I wasn’t 
Rocketman, until just a couple hours ago.” But right now 
he is beguiled at the prospect of 2.2 pounds of hashish 
and a million nearly-real marks. Nothing to walk away 
from, or fly or whatever it is, rightP So he takes a couple 


thousand in front and spends the rest of the night with . 


round and moaning Magda on Saure’s bed, while Trudi 
and Bodine lark in the bathtub, and Saure ‘slips back on 
some other mission, out into the three-o’clock waste that 
presses, oceanic, against their buoyed inner space... . 


od 


Saure to and fro, bloodshot and nagging, with a wreathing 
pot of tea. Slothrop’s alone in bed. The Rocketman cos- 
tume waits on a table, along with Seaman Bodine’s 
treasure map—oh. Oh, boy. Is Slothrop really going) to 
have to go through with this? 

Outside, birds whistle arpeggios up the steps, along the 
morning. Trucks and jeeps sputter in the distances. Slo- 
throp sits drinking tea and trying to scrape dried sperm 
off of his trousers while Saure explains the layout. The 
package is stashed under an ornamental bush outside a 
villa at 2 Kaiserstrasse, in Neubabelsberg, the old movie 
capital of Germany. That’s across the Havel from Potsdam. 
It seems prudent to stay off the Avus Autobahn. “Try to 
‘get past the checkpoint just after Zehlendorf instead. Come 
up on Neubabelsberg by canal.” 

“How come?” : 
“No civilians allowed on VIP Road—here, this one, that 
runs on across the river to Potsdam.” | 

“Come on. I'll need a boat, then.” : 

’ “Hal You expect improvisation from a German? No, no, 
that’s—that’s Rocketman’s problem! 1a 

“Unnhh.” Seems the villa fronts on the Griebnitz Fee. 
“Why don’t I hit it from that side?” 


In the Zone 433 


'~ “You'll have to go under a couple of bridges first, if you 
do. Heavily guarded. Plunging fire. Maybe—maybe even 
mortars. It gets very narrow opposite Potsdam. You won't 
have a chance.” Oh, German humor’s a fine way to start 
the morning. Saure hands Slothrop an AGO card, a trip 
' ticket, and ‘a pass printed in English and Russian. “The 
man who forged these has been in and out of Potsdam on 
_ them a dozen times since the Conference began. That’s 
how much faith he has in them. The bilingual pass is spe- 
' cial, just for the Conference. But you mustn’t spend time 
gawking like a tourist, asking celebrities for autographs—” 

“Well say look Emil, if you've got one of these and 
they’re so good, why don’t you go?” . 

' “It’s not my specialty. I stick to dealing. Just an old 
bottle of acid—and even that’s make-believe. Buccaneering 
is for Rocketmen.” 

“Bodine, then.” 

“He’s already on his way back to Ciidben: Won't he 

_ be upset, when he comes back next week, only to find that 
Rocketman, of all people, has shown the white feather.” 

“Oh.” Shit. Slothrop stares awhile at that map, then 
tries to memorize it. He puts on his boots, groaning. He 
bundles his helmet in that cape, and the two, conner and 
connee, set out through the American sector. 

Mare’s-tails are out seething across the blue sky, but 
down. here the Berliner: Luft ‘hangs still, with the odor of 

_ death inescapable. Thousands of corpses fallen back: in the 
spring still lie underneath these mountains of debris, yel- 
low mountains, red and yellow and pale. 

Where’s the city Slothrop used to see back in those 
newsreels and that National Geographic? Parabolas weren’t 
all that New German Architecture went in for—there were 
the spaces—the necropolism of blank alabaster in the 
staring sun, meant to be filled with human harvests rip- 
pling out of sight, making no sense without them. If there 
is such a thing as the City Sacramental, the city as out- 
ward and visible sign of inward and spiritual illness or 
health, then there may have been, even here, some con- 
tinuity of sacrament, through the terrible surface of May. 

_ The emptiness of Berlin this morning is an inverse map- 
_ ping of the white and geometric capital before the destruc- 
tion—the fallow and long-strewn fields of rubble, the same 


434 Gravity’s Rainsow 


weight of too much featureless concrete... except that 
here everything’s been turned inside out. The straight- 
ruled boulevards built to be marched along are now wind- 
ing pathways through the waste-piles, their shapes organic 
now, responding, like goat trails, to laws of least discom- 
fort. The civilians are outside now, the uniforms inside. 
Smooth facets of buildings have given way to cobbly in- 
sides of concrete blasted apart, all the endless-pebbled 
rococo just behind the shuttering. Inside is outside. Ceil- 
ingless rooms open to the sky, wall-less rooms pitched out 
over the sea of ruins in prows, in crow’s-nests. ... Old men 
with their tins searching the ground for cigarette butts 
wear their lungs on their breasts. Advertisements for 
shelter, clothing, the lost, the taken, once classified, folded 
biirgerlich inside newspapers to be read at one’s ease in 
the lacquered and graceful parlors are now stuck with 
Hitler-head stamps of blue, orange, and yellow, out in the 
wind, when the wind comes, stuck to trees, door-frames, 
planking, pieces of wall—white and fading scraps, writing 
spidery, trembling, smudged, thousands unseen, thousands 
unread or blown away. At the Winterhilfe one-course Sun- 
days you sat outside at long tables under the swastika- 
draped winter trees, but outside has been brought inside 
and that kind of Sunday lasts all week long. Winter is 
coming again. All Berlin spends the daylight trying to 
make believe it isn’t. Scarred trees are back in leaf, baby 
birds hatched and learning to fly, but winter's here behind 
the look of summer—Earth has turned over in its sleep, 
and the tropics are reversed... . 

Like the walls of the Chicago Bar brought outside, giant 
photographs are posted out in the Friedrichstrasse—faces 
higher than a man. Slothrop recognizes Churchill and 
Stalin all right, but isn’t sure about the other one. “Emil, © 
who’s that guy in the glasses?” 

“The American president. Mister Truman.” 

“Quit fooling. Truman is vice-president. Roosevelt is 
president.” L| 

Sdure raises an eyebrow. “Roosevelt died back in the — 
spring. Just before the surrender.” . : ee 

They get tangled in a bread queue. Women in worn 
plush coats, little kids holding on to frayed hems, men in ~ 
caps and dark double-breasted suits, unshaven old faces, © 


In the Zone 435 


foreheads white as a nurse’s leg.... Somebody tries to 
grab Slothrop’s cape, and there’s a brief tugging match. 
“Ym sorry,” Séure offers, when they’re clear again. 
“Why didnt anybody tell me?” Slothrop was going into 
high school when FDR was starting out in the White 
House. Broderick Slothrop professed to hate the man, but 
young Tyrone thought he was brave, with that polio and 
_all. Liked his voice on the radio. Almost saw him once 
too, in Pittsfield, but Lloyd Nipple, the fattest kid in 
Mingeborough, was standing in the way, and all Slothrop 
got to see was a couple wheels and the feet of some guys 
in suits on a running-board. Hoover he’d heard of, dimly— 
something to do with shack towns or vacuum cleaners— 
- but Roosevelt was his president, the only one he’d known. 
It seemed he’d just keep getting elected, term after term, 


_ forever. But somebody had decided to change that. So he 
was put to sleep, Slothrop’s president, quiet and neat, 


while the kid who once imaged his face on Lloyd’s 


_ T-shirted shoulderblades was jiving on the Riviera, or in 


Switzerland — only half aware of being extin- 


- guished himself. . 


“They said: it was a stroke,” Saure sez. His voice is ar- 


_ riving from some quite peculiar direction, let us say from 


directly underneath, as the wide necropolis begins now to 


_ draw inward, to neck down and stretchout into a Corridor, 
» one known to Slothrop though not by name, a deforma- 


tion of space that lurks inside his life, latent as a heredi- 


_ tary disease. A band of doctors in white masks that cover 


Ld 


| 
} 
| 
1 


: 


| 


everything but eyes, bleak and grown-up eyes, move in 
“step down the passage toward where Roosevelt is lying. 
They carry shiny black kits. Metal rings inside the black 
leather, rings as if to speak, as if a ventriloquist were 


playing a trick, help-let-me-out-of- -here.... Whoever it 
Was, posing in the black cape at Yalta with: the other lead- 


ers, conveyed beautifully the sense of Death’s wings, rich, 
soft and black as the winter cape, prepared a nation of 
starers for the passing of Roosevelt, a being They assem- 
bled, a being They would dismantle. . 

Someone here is cleverly allowing for parallax, scaling, 
_ shadows all going the right way and lengthening with the 
‘day—but no, Saure can’t be real, no more than these dark- 
clothed extras waiting in queues for some hypothetical 


436 Gravity’s Rainsow 


tram, some two slices of sausage (sure, sure), the dozen 
half-naked kids racing in and out of this burned tenement 
so amazingly detailed—They sure must have the budget, 
all right. Look at this desolation, all built then hammered 
back into pieces, ranging body-size down to powder 
(please order by Gauge Number), as that well-remem- 
bered fragrance Noon in Berlin, essence of human decay, 
is puffed on the set by a hand, lying big as a flabby horse 
up some alley, pumping its giant atomizer. ... 

(By Sadure’s black-market watch, it’s nearly noon. From 

11 to 12 in the morning is the Evil Hour, when the white 
woman with the ring of keys comes out of her mountain 
and may appear to you. Be careful, then. If you can’t 
free her from a spell she never -specifies, you'll be pun- 
ished. She is the beautiful maiden offering the Wonder- 
flower, and the ugly old woman with long teeth who found 
you in that dream and said nothing. The Hour is hers.) 
_ Black P-38s fly racketing in formation, in moving open- 
work against the pale sky. Slothrop and Saure find a café 
on the sidewalk, drink watered pink wine, eat bread and 
some cheese. That crafty old doper breaks out a “stick” of 
“tea” and they sit in the sun handing it back and forth, 
offering the waiter a hit, who can tell? that’s how you have 
to smoke armies too, these days. Jeeps, personnel carriers, 
and bicycles go streaming by. Girls in fresh summer frocks, 
orange and green as fruit ices, drift in to sit at tables, 
smiling, smiling, checking the area continuously for early 
business. 

Somehow Siaure has got Slothrop to talking about the 
Rocket. Not at all Sdure’s specialty, of course, though he’s 
been keeping an ear tuned. If it’s wanted, then it has a 
price. “I could never see the fascination. We kept hearing 
so much about it on the radio. It was our-Captain Mid- 
night Show. But we grew disillusioned. Wanting to’ be- 
lieve, but nothing we saw giving us that much faith. Less 
and less toward the end. All I know is it brought disaster 
down on the cocaine market, Kerl.” | 

“How’s that?” d 

“Something in that rocket ueedadie Po sium pertamigs 
nate, right?” ea Sa 

“Turbopump.” 

“Well, without that Purpurstoff you can't deal cotatite 
honestly. Forget honesty, there just wasn’t any reality. Last 


i 
i 


¢ | 


In the Zone ~ 437 


winter you couldn’t find a cc of permanganate in the whole 


fucking Reich, Kerl. Oh you should’ve seen the buming 


that was going on. Friends, understand. But what friend 
hasn’t wanted to—in terms you can recognize—push a pie 
in your face? eh?” 

“Thank you.” Wait a minute. Is he talking about us? 
Is he getting ready to— 

“So,” having continued, “there crept over Berlin a 


is gigantic Laurel and Hardy film, silent, silent ... because 


of the permanganate shortage, I don’t know what other 
economies may have been affected by the A4. This was 
not just pie-throwing, not just anarchy on a market, this 
was chemical irresponsibility; Clay, talcum, cement, even, 
it got this perverse, flour! Powdered milk, diverted from 


_the stomachs of little sucklings! Look-alikes that were 


worth even more than cocaine—but the idea was. that 
someone should get a sudden noseful of milk, hahahahahl” 
breaking up here for a minute, “and that was worth the 
loss! Without the permanganate there was no way to tell 
anything for sure. A little novocain to numb the tongue, 
something bitter for the taste, and you could be making 
enormous profits off of sodium bicarbonate. Permanganate 
is the touchstone. Under a microscope, you drop some on 
the substance in question, which dissolves—then you 


watch how it comes out of solution, how it recrystallizes: 


the cocaine will appear first, at the edges, then the vege- 
table cut, the procaine, the lactose at other well-known 
positions—a purple target, with the outer ring worth the 


most, and the bull’s-eye worth nothing. An anti-target. 
1) Certainly not the A4’s idea of one, eh, Rocketman. That 


machinery of yours was not exactly the doper’s friend. 


‘What do you want it for? Will your country use it against 
Russia?” 


“TI don’t want it. What do you mean, ‘my country’?” 

“I’m sorry. I only meant that it looks like the Russians 
want it badly enough. I’ve had connections all over the 
city taken away. Interrogated. None of them know any 
more about rockets than I do, But Tchitcherine thinks we 


: “Oboy. Him again?” 
_ “Yes he’s in Potsdam right now. Supposed to be. Set up 


| a headquarters in one of the old film studios.” 


“Swell news, Emil. With my luck...” 


438 Gravity's RAINBOW 


“You don’t look too good, Rocketman.” 

“Think that’s horrible? Try this!” and Slothrop proceeds 
to ask if Séure has heard anything about the Schwarzgerit. 

Saure does not exactly scream Aiyee! and run off down 
the street or anything, but squeeeak goes a certain valve all 
right, and something is routed another way. “I'll tell you 
what,” nodding and shifting in his seat, “you talk to der 
Springer. Ja, you two would get on fine. I am only a re- 
tired cat burglar, looking to spend my last several decades 
as the sublime Rossini did his: comfortable. Just dont 
mention me at all, O.K., Joe?” 

“Well, who is that der Springer, and where do I find 
him, Emil?” 

“He is the knight who leaps perpetually—” 

“Wow.” 

“—-across the chessboard of the Zone, is who he is. Just 
as Rocketman flies over obstacles today.” He laughs nastily. 
“A fine pair. How do I know where he is? He could be 
anyplace. He is everywhere.” 

“Zorro? The Green Hornet?” 

“Last I heard, a week or two ago, he was up north on 
the Hanseatic run. You will meet. Don’t worry.” Abruptly 
Saure stands up to go, shaking hands, slipping Rocketman 
another reefer for later, or for luck. “I have medical officers 
to see. The happiness of a thousand customers is on your 
shoulders, young man. Meet me at my place. Gliick.” 

So the Evil Hour has worked its sorcery. The wrong 
word was Schwarzgerat. Now the mountain has closed 
again thundering behind Slothrop, damn near like to crush 
his heel, and ‘it might just be centuries before that White 
Woman appears again. Shit. 

The name on the special pass is “Max Schlepzig.” Slo- 
throp, feeling full of pep, decides to pose as a vaudeville 
entertainer. An illusionist. He has had a good apprentice- 
ship with Katje, her damask tablecloth ae magical body, 
a bed for her salon, a hundred soirées fantastiques. . 

He’s through Zehlendorf by midaftemoon, ' inside’ his 
Rocketman rig and ready to cross. The Russian sentries | 
wait under a wood archway painted red, toting Suomis or 
Degtyarovs, oversize submachine guns with drum maga- 
zines. Here comes also a Stalin tank now, lumbering in| 
low, soldier in earflapped helmet standing up in the 76° 


In the Zone 439 


mm mount yelling into walkie-talkie ...uh, well.... On 

the other side of the arch is a Russian jeep with a couple 
sofficers, one talking earnestly into the mike of his radio 
set, and the air. between quickens with spoken Russian ‘at 
the speed of light weaving a net to catch Slothrop. Who 
else? He sweeps his cape back with a wink, tips his helmet 
and smiles. In a econjuror’s flourish he’s out with card, 
ticket ’n’ bilingual pass, giving them some line about a 
command performance in that Potsdam. 

One of the sentries takes the pass and nips into his 
kiosk to make a phone call. The others stand staring at 
Tchitcherine’s boots. No one speaks. The call is taking a 
while. Scarred leather, day-old breads, cheekbones in the 
sun. Slothrop’s trying to think of a few card tricks he can 
do, sort of break the ice, when the sentry sticks his head 
out. “Stiefeln, bitte.” 

Boots? What would they want with—yaaahhh! Boots, 
indeed, yes: We know beyond peradventure who has to be 
on the other end, don’t we. Slothrop ‘can hear all the man’s 
metal parts jingling with’ glee. In the smoky Berlin’ sky, 
somewhere to the left of the: Funkturm in its steel-wool 
distance, appears a full-page photo in Life magazine: it is 
of Slothrop, he is in full Rocketman attire, with what ap- 
pears to be along, stiff sausage of very large diameter 
being ‘stuffed into his mouth, so forcibly that his eyes are 

slightly, crossed, though the hand or agency actually hold- 
ing the stupendous wiener is not visible in the photo. 

A SNAFU FOR ROCKETMAN, reads the caption—“Barely off 
the ground, the Zone’s newest celebrity ‘fucks up.’” 
 We-e-e-ll, Slothrop slides off the boots, the sentry takes 

them inside to the telephone—the others lean Slothrop up 

‘against the arch and shake him down, finding nothing but 
‘the reefer Saure gave him, which they expropriate. Slo- 

throp waits in his socks, trying not to think ahead. Glanc- 
ing around for cover, maybe. Nothing. Clear field of fire 
for 360 degrees. Smells of fresh asphalt patch and gun oil. 

The: jeep, crystal verdigris, waiting: the road back to 

Berlin, for the moment, deserted.... Providence, hey 

— what'd ‘you do, oe out for 4 beer ‘or some- 

gp 

Not at all. The boots reappear, smiling sentry right 
behind them. “Stimmt, Herr. Schlepzig.” What does irony 


440 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


sound like in Russian? These birds are too inscrutable for 
Slothrop. Tchitcherine would’ve known enough not to arouse 
any suspicion by asking to see those boots. Nah, it 
couldn’t’ve been him on the phone. This was probably 
some routine search for that contraband, was all. Slothrop 
is being seized right now by what the Book of Changes 
calls Youthful Folly. He swirls his green cape a few more 
times, chisels a stubby Balkan army off of one of the 
tommyguns, and moseys away, southward. The officer’s 
jeep stays where it is, The tank has vanished. 


Jubilee Jim, just a-peddlin’ through the country, 
Winkin’ at the ladies from Stockbridge up to Lee— 
Buy your gal a brooch for a fancy gown, 
Buggy-whip rigs for just a dollar down, 

Hey come along ev’ rybody, headin’ for the Jubi-leel 


Two miles down the road, Slothrop hits that canal 
Séiure mentioned: takes a footpath down under the bridge 
where it’s wet and cool for a minute: He sets off along the 
bank, looking for a boat to hijack. Girls in halters and 
shorts lie sunning, brown and gold, all along this dreaming 
grass slope. The clouded afternoon is mellowed to wind- 
softened edges, children kneeling beside the water with 
fishing lines, two birds in a chase across the canal soaring 
down and up in a loop into the suspended storm of a 
green treetop, where they sit and begin to sing. With dis- 
tance the light gathers a slow ecru haze, girls’ flesh no 
longer bleached by the zenith sun now in gentler light 
reawakening to warmer colors, faint shadows of ink 
muscles, stretched filaments of skin cells saying touch .. 
stay.... Slothrop walks on—past eyes opening, 
breaking like kind dawns. What’s wrong with him? Stay, 
sure, But what keeps him passing by? 

There are a few boats, moored to railings, but ahecis 
somebody with an eye out. He finally comes on a narrow 
flat-bottomed little rig, oars in the locks and ready to go, 
nothing but a blanket upslope, a pair of high heels, man’s 
jacket, stand of trees nearby. So Slothrop climbs right in, 
and casts off. Have fun—a little nasty ase can't, but 
I can steal your boat! Hal 

He hauls till sundown, resting for At stretches, really 
out of condition, cape smothering him in a cone of sweat 


In the Zone 441 


so bad he has to take it off finally. Ducks drift at a wary 
distance, water dripping off of bright orange beaks. Sur- 
face of the canal ripples with evening wind, sunset in his 
eyes streaking the water red and gold: royal colors. Wrecks 
poke up out of the water, red lead and rust ripening in 
‘this light, bashed gray hullplates, flaking rivets, unlaid 
cable pointing hysterical strands to all points of the com- 
vibrating below any hearing in the breeze. Empty - 
ges drift by, loose and forlorn. A stork flies over, going 
home, below him suddenly the pallid arch of the Avus 
overpass ahead. Any farther and Slothrop’s back in the 
‘American sector. He angles across the canal, debarking on 
the opposite bank, and heads south, trying to skirt the 
Soviet control point the map puts someplace to his right. 
Massive movement in the dusk: Russian guardsmen, green- 
capped elite, marching and riding, pokerfaced, in trucks, 
on horseback. You can feel the impedance in the fading 
day, the crowding, jittering wire loops, Potsdam warning 
stay away...stay away.... The closer it comes, the 
denser the field around that cloaked international gather- 
ing across the Havel. Bodine’s right: a gnat can’t get in. 
Slothrop knows it, but just keeps on skulking along, seek- 
ing less sensitive axes of suspicion, running zigzags, aimed 
innocuously south. 

Invisible. It becomes easier to believe in the longer he 
can keep going. Sometime back on Midsummer Eve, be- 
tween midnight and one, fern seed fell in his shoes. He is 
the invisible youth, the armored changeling. Providence’s 

‘little pal. Their preoccupation is with forms of danger the 
War has taught them—phantoms they may be doomed 
now, some of them, to carry for the rest of their lives. 
Fine for Slothrop, though—it’s a set of threats he doesn’t 
belong to. They are still back in geographical space, draw- 
ing deadlines and authorizing personnel, and the only 
beings who can violate their space are safely caught and 

paralyzed in comic books. They think. They don’t now 
about Rocketman. here. They keep passing him and he 

‘Temains alone, blotted to evening by velvet and buckskin— 
“if they do see him his image is shunted immediately out 
“to the boondocks of the brain where it remains in exile 

" with other critters of the night. ... 

_ Presently he cuts right again, toward the sunset. There’s 


» 


ote 
F 9 Z 


442 Gravity's Rainsow | 


still that big superhighway to get across, Some Germans 
haven’t been able to get home for.10, 20 years because 
they were caught on the wrong side of some Autobahn 
when it went through. Nervous and leadfooted now, Slo- 
throp comes creeping up to the Avus embankment, listen- 
ing to traffic vacuuming by above. Each driver thinks he’s 
in control of his vehicle, each thinks he has a separate 
destination, but Slothrop knows better. The drivers are out 
tonight because They need them where they are, forming 
a deadly barrier. Amateur Fritz von Opels all over the 
place here, promising a lively sprint for throp-—snarling 
inward toward that famous S-curve where maniacs in w. 
helmets and dark goggles once witched their wind-faired 
machinery around the banked brick in shrieking drifts 
(admiring eyes of colonels in dress uniforms, colonels’ 
ladies in Garbo fedoras, all safe. up in their white towers 
yet belonging to the day’s adventure, each waiting for his 
sma gh surfacing of the same mother-violence under- 
nea 

Slothrop frees his arms from the cape, lets a lean gray 
Porsche whir by, then charges out, the red of its tailli 
flashing along his downstream leg, headlights of a fast- 
coming Army truck now hitting the upstream one and 
touching the grotto of one eyeball to blue jigsaw. He 
swings sideways as he runs, screaming, “Hauptstufel” 
which is the Rocketman war-cry, raises both arms and the 
sea-green fan of the cape’s silk lining, hears brakes go on, 
keeps running, hits the center mall in a roll, scampering 
into the bushes as the truck skids past and stops. Voices 
for a while. Gives Slothrop a chance to catch his breath 
and get the cape unwound from around his neck. The 
truck finally starts off again. The southbound half of the 
Avus is slower tonight, and he can jog across easy, down 
the bank and uphill again into trees. Hey! Leaps bied 
highways in a single bound! 

Well, Bodine, your map is perfect here, except for one 
trivial detail you sort of, uh, forgot to mention, wonder 
why that was.... It turns out something’ like 150 houses 
in Neubabelsberg have been commandeered and sealed 
off as a compound for the Allied delegates to the Potsdam 
Conference, and Jolly Jack Tar has to ahed that dope 
right in the middle of it. Barbed wire, searchlights, sirens, 


ae 


In the Zone 443 


security who’ve forgotten how to smile. Thank goodness, 
which is to say Sdure Bummer, for this special pass here. 
Stenciled signs with arrows read ADMIRALTY, F.O., STATE 
DEPARTMENT, CHIEFS’ OF STAFF.... The whole joint is lit 
up like a Hollywood premiere. Great coming and going of 
civilians in suits, gowns, tuxedos, getting in and out of 
BMW limousines with flags of all nations next to the 
windscreens. Mimeographed handouts clog the stones and 
gutters. Inside the sentry boxes are piles of confiscated 
‘cameras. 

They must deal here with a strange collection of those 
showbiz types. Nobody seems too upset at the helmet, 
cape, or mask. There are ambiguous shrugging phone calls 
and the odd feeble question, but they do let Max Schlep- 
zig pass. A gang of American newspapermen comes 
through in a charabanc, clutching on to bottles of liberated 
Moselle, and they offer him a lift part way. Soon they 
have fallen to arguing about which celebrity he is. Some 
think he is Don Ameche, others Oliver Hardy. Celebrity? 
what is this? “Come on,” sez Slothrop, “you just don’t 
know me in this getup. I’m that Errol Flynn.” Not every- 
body believes him, but he manages to hand out a few 
autographs anyhow. When they part company, the news- 
hounds are discussing the candidates for Miss Rheingold 
1946. Dorothy Hart’s advocates are the loudest, but Jill 
Darnley has a majority on her side. It’s all gibberish to 
Slothrop—it will be months yet before he runs into a 
beer advertisement featuring the six beauties, and find him- 
self rooting for a girl named Helen Riickert: a blonde with 
a Dutch surname who will remind him dimly of some- 
one.... 

The house at 2 Kaiserstrasse is styled in High Prussian 
Boorish and painted a kind of barf brown, a color the ice- 
cold lighting doesn’t improve. It is more heavily guarded 
than any other in the compound. Gee, Slothrop wonders 
why. Then he sees the sign with the place’s stenciled alias 
on it. 

- “Oh, no. No. Quit fooling.” For a while he stands in the 
Street shivering and cursing that Seaman Bodine for a 
bungler, villain, and agent of death. Sign sez THE WHITE 
HOUSE. Bodine has brought him straight to the dapper, 
bespectacled stranger who gazed down the morning Fried- 


be 


oi), 
oe 
“4 


444 Gravity's RAINBOW 


richstrasse—to the face that has silently dissolved in to 
replace the one Slothrop never saw and now never will. 

The sentries with slung rifles are still as himself. The 
folds of his cape are gone to corroded bronze under the 
arc-lighting, Behind the villa water rushes. Music strikes 
up inside and obliterates the sound. An entertainment. No 
wonder he got in so easy. Are they expecting this magi- 
cian, this late guest? Glamour, fame. He could run in and 
throw himself at somebody’s feet, beg for amnesty. End 
up getting a contract for the rest of his life with a radio 
network, o-or even a movie studio! That’s what mercy is, 
isn’t it? He turns, trying to be casual about it, and goes 
moseying out of the light, looking for a way down to that 
water, 

The shore of the Griebnitz See is dark, starlit, strung 
with wire, alive with roving sentries. Potsdam’s lights, 
. piled and scattered, twinkle across the black water. Slo- 
throp has to go in up to his ass a few times to get past’ 
that wire, and wait for the sentries to gather around a 
cigarette at one end of their beat before he can make a 
dash, cape-flapping and soggy, up to the villa. Bodine’s 
hashish is buried along one side of the house, under a cer- 
tain juniper bush. Slothrop squats down aud starts scoop- 
ing up dirt with his hands. 

Inside it is some do. Girls are singing “Don’t Sit Under 
the Apple Tree,” and if it ain’t the Andrews Sisters it may 
as well be. They are accompanied by a dance band with 
a mammoth reed section. Laughing, sounds of glassware, 
multilingual chitchat, your average weekday night here at 
the great Conference. The hash is wrapped in tinfoil in- 
side a moldering ditty bag. It smells really good. Aw, 
jeepers—why’d he forget to bring a pipe? 

Actually, it’s just as well. Above Slothrop, at eye level, 
is a terrace, and espaliered peach trees in milky blossom. 
As he crouches, hefting the bag, French windows open 
and someone steps out on this terrace for some air. Slo- 
throp freezes, thinking invisible, invisible.... Footsteps 
approach, and over the railing leans-——well, this may 
sound odd, but it’s Mickey Rooney. Slothrop recognizes 
him on sight, Judge Hardy’s freckled madcap son, three-. 
dimensional, flesh, in a tux and am-I-losing-my-mind face, 


| 
= | 
a | 


In the Zone: 445 


Mickey Ronney stares at Rocketman holding a bag of 
‘hashish, a wet apparition in helmet and cape. Nose level 
with Mickey Rooney’s shiny black shoes, Slothrop looks up 
into the lit room behind—sees somebody looks a bit like 
Churchill, lotta dames in evening gowns cut so low that 


_ even from this angle you can see more tits than they got 
at Minsky’s...and maybe, maybe he even gets a glimpse 
. of that President Truman. He knows he is seeing Mickey 
_ Rooney, though Mickey Rooney, wherever he may go, 


will repress the fact that he ever saw Slothrop. It is an 


_ extraordinary moment. Slothrop feels he ought to say 


something, but his speech centers have failed him in a 
drastic way. Somehow, “Hey, you're Mickey Rooney,” 
seems inadequate. So they stay absolutely still, victory’s 
night blowing by around them, and the great in the yellow 
electric room scheming on oblivious. 

Slothrop breaks it first: puts a finger to his mouth and 
scuttles away, back around the villa and down to the 
shore, leaving Mickey Rooney with his elbows on that rail- 
ing, still watching. 

Back around the wire, avoiding sentires, close to the 


' water's edge, swinging the ditty bag by its drawstring, 
| some vague idea in his head now of finding another boat 


and just rowing back up that Havel—sure!l Why not? It 
isn’t till he hears distant conversation from another villa 
that it occurs to him he might be straying into the Russian 
part of the compound. 

“Hmm,” opines Slothrop, “well in that case I had bet- 


| ter—” 


Here comes that wiener again. Shapes only a foot 
away—they might have risen up out of the water. He 
spins around, catches sight of a broad, clean-shaven face, 
hair combed lionlike straight back, glimmering steel teeth, 
eyes black and soft as that Carmen Miranda’s— 

“Yes,” no least accent to his English whispering, “you 
were followed all the way.” Others have grabbed Slothrop’s 
arms. High in the left one he feels something sharp, al- 
most painless, very familiar. Before his throat can stir he’s 


| away, on the Wheel, clutching in terror to the dwindling 
| white point of himself, in the first windrush of anaesthesia, 


hovering coyly over the pit of Death... 


4 


Snes 


446 Gravity's Ramwsow 


Oo 


A soft night, smeared full of golden stars, the kind of night 
back on the pampas that Leopoldo Lugones liked to write 
about. The U-boat rocks quietly on the surface. The only 


Bas 
the generator. Luz and Felipe are 
By the 20 mm mounts, Graciela Imago Portales lounges 
wistfully. In her day she was the urban idiot of B.A, 
threatening nobody, friends with everybody across the 
spectrum, from Cipriano Reyes, who intervened for her 


for before 
it got busted. She was a particular favorite of the literati. 
Borges is said to have dedicated a poem to’ her (“El labe- 
rinto de tu incertidumbre/ Me trama con la disquietante 
luna... .”). 
The crow thet hijacked:<hle:ti-laaasetienstaak aaa 
kinds of Argentine manias. El Nato goes termarmceh 5 i 
in 19th- “century gaucho sloeneedclaeeeee are “pitos,” 
are “puchos,” A ie ole nes, pe 


ing up to El Reto Bel4uste acting ship’s engineer, is 
from Entre Rios, and a to in the regional tr 
A pretty good Et Agee, 
which is one reason El Nato hasn’t made a yet for 
godless Mesopotamian Bolshevik. It is a beh 
solidarity, but then it’s only one of several, 
rently with Felipe, though she’s supposed to 
dozzi's girl—after Squalidozzi on 
Ziirich she took up with the poet on of 
recitation of Lugones’s “Pavos Reales,” balmy 
lying to off Matosinhos, For this crew). 
seasickness: only the hope of dying from it is 
them alive, 


lanky 
Sbage i 


oie 


ij 


ar ; 


In the Zone 447 


_ Squalidozzi did show up again though, in Bremerhaven. 
_ He had just been chased across what was left of Germany 
by British Military Intelligence, with no idea why. 

“Why didn’t you go to Geneva, and try to get through 
to usP” 

“I didn’t want to lead them to Ibargiiengoitia. I sent 
someone else.” 

“Who?” Beldustegui wanted to know. 

“T never got his name.” Squalidozzi scratched his shaggy 
head. “Maybe it was a stupid thing to do.” 

“No further contact with him?” 

“None at all.” 

_ “They'll be watching us, then,” Beldustegui sullen. 
“Whoever he is, he’s hot. You’re a fine judge of character.” 

“What did you want me to do: take him to a psychiatrist 

first? Weigh options? Sit around for a few weeks and 
\ think about it?” 

“He’s right,” El Nato raising a large fist. “Let women 
do their thinking, their analyzing. A man must always go 
forward, looking Life directly in the face.” 

“You're disgusting,” said Graciela Imago Portales. 
“You're not a man, you're a sweaty horse.” 

“Thank you,” El Nato bowing, in all gaucho dignity. 

Nobody was yelling. The conversation in the steel space 
that night was full of quiet damped ss and palatal ys, the 
peculiar, reluctant poignancy of Argentine Spanish, brought 
along through years of frustrations, self-censorship, long 
roundabout evasions of political truth—of bringing the 
\State to live in the muscles of your tongue, in the humid 
intimacy just inside your lips... pero ché, no sé6s argen- 
tino.... 

In Bavaria, Squalidozzi was stumbling through the out- 
skirts of a town, only minutes ahead of a Rolls Royce with 
a sinister dome in the roof, green Perspex you couldn’t see 
through. It was just after sunset. All at once he heard 
gunshots, hoofbeats, nasal and metallic voices in English, 
But the quaint little town seemed deserted. How could 
this be? He entered a brick labyrinth that had been a 

nica factory. Splashes of bell-metal lay forever un- 
Tung in the foundry dirt. Against a high wall that had 
recently been painted white, the shadows of horses and 
their riders drummed. Sitting watching, from workbenches 


448 Gravity’s Ramnsow : 


and crates, were a dozen individuals Squalidozzi recog- 
nized right away as gangsters, Cigar-ends glowed, and : 
molls whispered back and forth in German. The men ate 
sausages, ripping away the casings with white teeth, well 
cared for, that flashed in the light from the movie, "They q 
were sporting the Caligari gloves which now enjoy a sum- 
mer vogue in the Zone: bone white, except for the four 
lines in deep violet fanning up each gloveback from wrist 
to knuckles. All wore suits nearly as light-colored as the 
teeth. It seemed extravagant to Squalidozzi, after Buenos 
Aires and Ziirich. The women crossed their legs often: 
they were tense as vipers. In the air was a grassy smell, a 
smell of leaves burning, that was strange to the Argentine 
who, terminally homesick, had only the smell of freshly 
brewed maté after a bitter day at the racetrack to con- 
nect it with. Crowned window frames gave out on the 
brick factory courtyard where summer air moved softly. - 
The filmlight flickered blue across empty windows as if it 
were breath trying to produce a note. The images grew 
blunt with vengeance. “Yay!” screamed all the zootsters, 
white gloves bouncing up and down. Their mouths and 
eyes were as wide as children’s. 

The reel ended, but the space stayed dark. An enor- 
mous figure in a white zoot-suit stood, stretched, and 
ambled right over to where Squalidozzi was crouching, 
terrified. 

“They after you, amigo?” 

“Please—” 

“No, no. Come on, Watch with us. It’s a Bob Steele. 
He’s a good old boy. You're safe in here.” For days, as it — 
turned out, the gangsters had known Squalidozzi was in 
the neighborhood: they could infer to his path, though he — 
himself was invisible to them, by the movements of the 
police, which were not. Blodgett Waxwing—for it was — 
he—used the analogy of a cloud mae and the Mess’ 
trail a high-speed particle leaves. . | 

“I don’t understand.” | Li 

“Not sure I do either, pal. But we have|to keep an eye © 
on everything, and right now all the hepcats are going * 
goofy over something called ‘nuclear physics.’ ” | 

After the movie, Squalidozzi was introduced to Ger- 
hardt- von Géll, also known by his nom de pégre, “Der 
Springer.” Seems von Géll’s people and Waxwing’s were in 


ei Rice Sadnviaz 


In the Zone 449 


the course of a traveling business conference, rumbling 
the roads of the Zone in convoy, changing trucks and 
busses so often there was no time for real sleep, only 
cat-naps—in the middle of the night, the middle of a 
field, no telling when, you'd have to pile out, switch ve- 
hicles and take off again along another road. No destina- 
tions, no fixed itinerary. Most of the transportation was 
furnished through the expertise of veteran automotive 
jobber Edouard Sanktwolke, who could hot-wire anything 
on wheels or caterpillar tracks—even packed around a 
custom-built ebony case full of the rotor arms, each in its 
velvet recess, to every known make, model, and year, in 
case the target’s owner had removed that vital part. 

Squalidozzi and von Goll hit it off right away. This film 
director turned marketeer had decided to finance all his 
_ future movies out of his own exorbitant profits. “Only way 
to be sure of having final cuts, ¢verdad? Tell me, Squali- 
dozzi, are you too pure for thisP Or could your anarchist 
project use:a little help?” 

“It would depend what you wanted from us.” 

“A film, of course. What would you like to doP How 
about Martin Fierro?” 

Keep the customer happy. Martin Fierro is not just the 
gaucho hero of a great Argentine epic poem. On the 
U-boat he is considered an anarchist saint. Herndndez’s 
poem has figured in Argentine political thinking for years 
‘now—everybody’s had his own interpretation, quoting 
from it often as vehemently as politicians in 19th-century 
‘Italy used to from I Promessi Sposi. It goes back to the 
old basic polarity in Argentina: Buenos Aires vs. the prov- 
inces, or, as Felipe sees it, central government vs. gaucho 
anarchism, of which he has become the leading theoreti- 
cian. He has one of these round-brim hats with balls hang- 
ing from it, he has taken to lounging in the hatchways, 
waiting for Graciela—“Good evening, my dove. Haven’t 
you got a kiss for the Gaucho Bakunin?” 

“You look more like a Gaucho Marx,” Graciela drawls, 
and leaves Felipe to go back to the treatment he’s working 
on for von Gdll, using El Nato’s copy of Martin Fierro, 
which has long ‘been thumbed into separate loose pages, 
and smells of horses, each of whose names El Nato, tear- 
fully mamao, can tell you. . 

'. A shadowed plain at guindown: An enormous flatness, 
{ 


450 Gravity's RAINBOW 


Camera angle is kept low. People coming in, slowly, singly 
or in small groups, working their way across the plain, in 
to a settlement at the edge of a little river. Horses, cattle, 
fires against the growing darkness. Far away, at the hori- 
zon, a solitary figure on horseback appears, and rides in, 
all the way in, as the credits come on, At some point we see 
the guitar slung on his back: he is a payador, a wondering 
singer. At last he dismounts and goes to sit with the peo- 
ple at the fire. After the meal and a round of cafia he 
reaches for his guitar and begins to strum his three lowest 
strings, the bordona, and sing: 


Aqui me pongo a cantar 

al compas de la vigiiela, 

que el hombre que lo desvela 
una pena estrordinaria, 
como la ave solitaria 

con el cantar se consuela. 


So, as the Gaucho sings, his story unfolds—a montage of 
his early life on the estancia. Then the army comes and 
conscripts him. Takes him out to the frontier to kill Indians. 
It is the period of General Roca’s campaign to open the 
pampas by exterminating the people who live there: tuin- 


ing the villages into labor camps, bringing more of the © 


country under the control of Buenos Aires. Martin Fierro 
is soon sick of it. It’s against everything he knows is right. 
He deserts. They send out a posse, and he talks the ser- 
geant in command over to his side. Together they flee 
across the frontier, to live in the wilderness, to live with 
the Indians. 


That’s Part I. Seven years later, Hernandez wrote a 


Return of Martin Fierro, in which the Gaucho sells out: 
assimilates back into Christian society, gives up his free- 
dom for the kind of constitutional Gesellschaft being 


pushed in those days by Buenos Aires. A very moral end- — 


ing, but completely opposite to the first. 
“What should I do?” von Goll seems to! want to know. 
“Both parts, or just Part IP” 
“Well,” begins Squalidozzi. 


“I know what you want. But I might get better wiledae : 


out of two movies, if the first does well at the box office. 
But will it?” 


In the Zone . 451 


“Of course it will.” 

“Something that anti-social?” 

“But it’s everything we believe in,” Squalidozzi protests. 

“But even the freest of Gauchos end up selling out, you 
know. That’s how things are.” 

That’s how Gerhardt von Goll is, anyway. Graciela 
knows the man: there are lines of liaison, sinister connec- 
tions of blood and of wintering at Punta del Este, through 
Anilinas Alemanas, the IG branch in Buenos Aires, on 
through Spottbilligfllm AG in Berlin (another IG outlet) 
from whom von Goll used to get cut rates on most of his — 
film stock, especially on the peculiar and slow-moving 
“Emulsion J,” invented by Laszlo Jamf, which somehow 
was able, even under ordinary daylight, to render the 
human skin transparent to a depth of half a millimeter, 
revealing the face just beneath the surface. This emulsion 
was used extensively in von Gdll’s immortal Alpdriicken, 
and may even come to figure in Martin Fierro. The only 
part of the epic that really has von Goll fascinated is a 
singing-duel between the white gaucho and the dark El 
Moreno. It seems like an interesting framing device. With 
Emulsion J he could dig beneath the skin colors of the 
contestants, dissolve back and forth between J and ordinary 
stock, like sliding in and out of focus, or wipe—how he 
loved wipes! from one to the other in any number of clever 
ways. Since discovering that Schwarzkommando are really 
‘in the Zone, leading real, paracinematic lives that have 
nothing to do with him or the phony Schwarzkommando 
footage he shot last winter in England for Operation Black 
Wing, Springer has been zooming around in a controlled 
ecstasy of megalomania. He is convinced that his film has 
somehow brought them into being, “It is my mission,” he 
announces to Squalidozzi, with the profound humility that 
only a German movie director can summon, “to sow in the 
Zone seeds of reality, The historical moment demands this, 
and I can only be its servant. My images, somehow, have 
been chosen for incarnation, What I can do for the 
Schwarzkommando I can do for your dream of pampas 
and sky.... I can take down your fences and your laby- 
‘rinth walls, I can lead you back to the Garden you hardly 
remember. .. .” 

_ His madness clearly infected Squalidozzi, who then 


4 


a 


es 
452 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


eventually returned to the U-boat and infected the others. 
It seemed what they had been waiting for. “Africans!” 
daydreamed the usually all-business Belaustegui at a staff 
meeting. “What if it’s true? What if we've really come 
back, back to the way it was before the continents drifted 
apart?” 

“Back to Gondwanaland,” whispered Felipe. “When Rio 
de la Plata was just opposite South-West Africa... and 
the mesozoic refugees took the ferry not to Montevideo, 
but to Liideritzbucht. . . .” 

The plan is to get somehow to the Liineburg Heath and 
set up a small estancia. Von Géll is to meet them there. 
By the gun-mounts tonight,. Graciela Imago Portales 
dreams. Is von Géll a compromise they can tolerate? There 
are worse foundations than a film. Did Prince Potemkin’s 
fake villages survive Catherine’s royal progress? Will the 
soul of the Gaucho survive the mechanics of putting him 
into light and sound? Or will someone ultimately come by, 
von Géll or another, to make a Part II, and dismantle the 
dream? 

Above and beyond her the Zodiac glides, a north- 
hemisphere array she never saw in Argentina, smooth as 
an hour-hand.... Suddenly there’s a long smash of static 
out of the P.A., and Beldustegui is screaming, “Der Aall 
Der Aall” The eel, wonders Graciela, the eel? Oh, yes, 
the torpedo. Ah, Beldustegui is as bad as El Nato, he feels 
his own weird obligation to carry on in German sub- 
mariner slang, it is just precisamente a seagoing Tower of 
Babel here—the torpedo? why is he ‘screaming about the 
torpedo? 

For the good reason that the U-boat has just appeared 
on the radar screen of the U.S.S. John E. Badass (smile, 
U-boat! ), as a “skunk” or unidentified pip, and the Badass, 
in muscular postwar reflex, is now lunging in at flank 
speed. Reception tonight is perfect, the green return “fine- 
_ grained as a baby’s skin,” confirms Spyros (“Spider”) Telan- 

giecstasis, Radarman 2nd Class. You can see clear out to 
the Azores. It is a mild, fluorescent summer evening on the 
sea. But what’s this on the screen now, moving fast, sweep — 
by sweep, broken as a drop of light from the original pip, 
tiny but unmistakable, in toward the unmoving center of 
the sweep, closer now— 


In the Zone 453 


“Bakerbakerbakerl” hollers somebody down in Sonar, 
loud and scared, over the phones. It means hostile torpedo 
on the way. Coffee messes go crashing, parallel rulers and 
dividers sliding across the glass top of the dead-reckoning 
‘tracer as the old tin can goes heeling over around onto an 

evasion pattern that was already obsolete during the 
Coolidge administration. 

Der Aal’s pale tunnel of wake is set to intersect the 
Badass’s desperate sea-squirm about midships. What inter- 
venes is the drug Oneirine, as the hydrochloride. The 
machine from which it has emerged is the coffee urn in 
the mess hall of the John E. Badass. Playful Seaman 
Bodine—none other—has seeded tonight’s grounds with a 
massive dose of Laszlo Jamf’s celebrated intoxicant, scored 
on Bodine’s most recent trip to Berlin. 

The property of time-modulation peculiar to Oneirine 
was one of the first to be discovered by investigators. “It 
is experienced,” writes Shetzline in his classic study, “in a 

subjective sense...uh... well. Put it this way. It’s like 
stuffing wedges of silver sponge, right, into, your brain!” 
So, out in the mellow sea-return tonight, the two fatal 
courses do intersect in space, but not in time. Not nearly 
in time, heh heh. What BeldAustegui fired his torpedo at 
was a darkrust old derelict, carried passively by currents 
and wind, but bringing to the night something of the skull; 
an announcement of metal emptiness, of shadow, that has 
‘spooked even stronger positivists than Bel4ustegui. And 
what passed into visual recognition from the small speed- 
, ing pip on the Badass’s radar screen proved to be a corpse, 
dark in color, perhaps a North African, which the crew on 
the destroyer’s aft 3-inch gun mount spent half an hour 
blowing to pieces as the gray warship slid by at a safe 
distance, fearful of plague. 

Now what sea is this you have crossed, exactly, and 
what sea is it you have plunged more than once to the 
bottom of, alerted, full of adrenalin, but caught really, 
buffaloed under the epistemologies of these threats that 
paranoid you so down and out, caught in this steel pot, 
softening to devitaminized mush inside the soup-stock of 
your own words, your waste submarine breath? It took the 
‘Dreyfus Affair to get the Zionists out and doing, finally: 

what will drive you out of your soup-kettle? Has it already 


454 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


happened? Was it tonight’s attack and deliverance? Will 
you go to the Heath, and begin your settlement, and wait 
there for your Director to come? 


O 


Under a tall willow tree beside a canal, in a jeep, in the 
shade, sit Tchitcherine and his driver Dzabajev, a teenage 
Kazakh dope fiend with pimples and a permanently surly 
look, who combs his hair like the American crooner Frank 
Sinatra, ‘and who is, at the moment, frowning at a slice of 
hashish and telling Tchitcherine, “Well, you should have 
taken more than this, you know.” 

“T only took what his freedom is worth to him,” explains 
Tchitcherine. “Where’s that pipe, now?” 

“How do you know what his freedom is worth to him? 
You know what I think? I think you're going a little Zone- 
happy out here.” This Dzabajev is more of a sidekick, 
really, than a driver, so he enjoys immunity, up to a point, 
in questioning Tchitcherine’s wisdom. 

“Look, peasant, you read the transcript in there. That 
man is one unhappy loner. He’s got problems. He’s more 
useful running around the Zone thinking he’s free, but he’d 
be better off locked up somewhere, He doesn’t even know 
what his freedom is, much less what it’s worth. So I get 
to fix the price, which doesn’t matter to begin with.” 

“Pretty authoritarian,” sneers young Dzabajev. “Where's 
the matches?” 

It’s sad, though. Tchitcherine likes Slothrop. He feels 
that, in any normal period of history, they could easily be 
friends. People who dress up in bizarre costumes have a 
savoir-vivre—not to mention the sort of personality dis- 
order—that he admires. When he was a little boy, back in 
Leningrad, Tchitcherine’s mother sewed by hand a cos- 
tume for him to wear in a school entertainment. Tchi- 
tcherine was the wolf. The minute he pu on the head, in 
front of the mirror by the ikon, he knew - elf. He was 
the wolf. 

The Sodium Amytal session nags at ad linings of Tchi- 
tcherine’s brain as if the hangover were his own. Deep, 
deep—turther than politics, than sex or infantile terrors... 


, rs ve et 
, vf 


Selethe-Zone 455 


a plunge into the nuclear blackness.... Black runs all 
through the transcript: the recurring color black. Slothrop 
never mentioned Enzian by name, nor the Schwarzkom- 
mando, But he did talk about the Schwarzgerat. And he 
also coupled “schwarz-” with some strange nouns, in the 
German fragments that came through. Blackwoman, Black- 
rocket, Blackdream.... The new coinages seem to be 
made unconsciously, Is there a single root, deeper than 
anyone has probed, from which Slothrop’s Blackwords only 
appear to flower separatelyP Or has he by way of the 
language caught the German mania for name-giving, divid- 
ing the Creation finer and finer, analyzing, setting namer 
more hopelessly apart from named, even to bringing in 
the mathematics of combination, tacking together estab- 
lished nouns to get new ones, the insanely, endlessly 
diddling play of a chemist whose molecules are words. ... 

Well, the man is a puzzle. When Geli Tripping first sent 
word of his presence in the Zone, Tchitcherine was only 
interested enough to keep a routine eye on him, along with 
the scores of others. The only strange item, which grew 
Stranger as surveillance developed, was that he seemed to 
be alone. To date Slothrop has still not recorded, tagged, 
discovered, or liberated a single scrap of A4 hardware or 
intelligence. He reports neither to SPOG, CIOS, BAFO, 
TI, nor any American counterpart—indeed, to no known 
Allied office. Yet he is one of the Faithful: the scavengers 
now following industriously the fallback routes of A4 
batteries from the Hook of Holland all across Lower 
Saxony. Pilgrims along the roads of miracle, every bit and 
piece a sacred relic, every scrap of manual a verse of 
Scripture. 

But the ordinary hardware doesn’t interest Slothrop. He 
is holding out, saving himself for something absolutely 
unique. Is it the Blackrocket? Is it the oooo00? Enzian is 
looking for it, and for the mysterious Schwarzgerit. There 
is a very good chance that Slothrop, driven by his Black- 
phenomenon, responding to its needs though they be 
hidden from him, will keep returning, cycle after cycle, to 
Enzian, until the mission is resolved, the parties secured, 
the hardware found. It’s a strong hunch: nothing Tchi- 
tcherine will ever put into writing. Operationally he’s alone 
as Slothrop is out here—reporting, if and when, direct to 


456 Gravirty’s RAInBow 


Malenkov’s special committee under the Council of Peo-— 
ple’s Commissars (the TsAGI assignment being more or 


less a cover). But Slothrop is his boy. He'll be followed, 


all right. If they lose him why they'll find him again. Too ~ 


bad he can’t be motivated personally to go get Enzian. But 
Tchitcherine is hardly fool enough to think that all Ameri- 
cans are as easy to exploit as Major Marvy, with his re- 
flexes about blackness... . 

It’s a shame. Tchitcherine and Slothrop could have 
smoked hashish together, compared notes on Geli and 
other girls of the ruins. He could have sung to the Ameri- 
can songs his mother taught him, Kiev lullabies, starlight, 
lovers, white blossoms, nightingales.... 

“Next time we run across that Englishman,” Dzabajev 
looking curiously at his hands on the steering-wheel, “or 
American, or whatever he is, find out, will you, where he 
got this shit?” 


“Make a note of that,” orders Tchitcherine. They both 


start cackling insanely there, under the tree. 


O 


Slothrop comes to in episodes that fade in and out of 
. sleep, measured and serene exchanges in Russian, hands at 
his pulse, the broad green back of someone just leaving 
the room... . It’s a white room, a perfect cube, though for 
a while he can’t recognize cubes, walls, lying horizontal, 
anything too spatial. Only the certainty, that he’s been 
shot up yet again with that Sodium Amytal. That feeling 
he knows. 

He’s on a cot, still in Rocketman garb, helmet on the 


floor down next to the ditty bag of hash—oh-oh. Though © 


it requires superhuman courage in the face of doubts © 


about whether or not he can really even move, he man- — 
ages to flop over and check out that dope. One of the 


tinfoil packages looks smaller. He spends an anxious hour’ 


or two undoing the top to reveal, sure enough, a fresh cut, — 


raw green against the muddy brown of the great chunk. — 


Footsteps ring down metal stairs outside, and a heavy door — 
slides to below. Shit. He lies in the white cube, feeling 
groggy, feet crossed hands behind head, doesn’t care espe- _ 


+i 


~ In the Zone 457 


cially to go anyplace.... He dozes off and dreams about 
birds, a close flock of snow buntings, blown in a falling- 
leaf of birds, among the thickly falling snow. It’s back in 
Berkshire. Slothrop is little, and holding his father’s hand. 
The raft of birds swings, buffeted, up, sideways through 
the storm, down again, looking for food. “Poor little guys,” 
sez Slothrop, and feels his father squeeze his hand through 
its wool mitten. Broderick smiles. “They're all right.. Their 
hearts beat very, very fast. Their blood and their feathers 
keep them warm. Don’t worry, son. Don’t worry....” 
Slothrop wakes again to the white room. The quiet. Raises 
his ass and does a few feeble bicycle exercises, then lies 
slapping on new flab that must’ve collected on his stomach 
while he was out. There is an invisible kingdom of flab, a 
million cells-at-large, and they all know who he is—soon 
as he’s unconscious, they start up, every one, piping in high 
horrible little Mickey Mouse voices, hey fellas! hey c’mon, 
let’s all go over to Slothrop’s, the big sap ain’t doing any- 
thing but laying on his ass, cmon, oboy! “Take that,” 
Slothrop mutters, “a-and that!” 

Arms and legs apparently working, he gets up groaning, 
puts his helmet on his head, grabs the ditty bag and leaves 
by the door, which shudders all over, along with the walls, 
when he opens it. Aha!’ Canvas flats. It’s a movie set. 
Slothrop finds himself in a dilapidated old studio, dark 
except where yellow sunlight comes through small holes in 
the overhead. Rusted catwalks, creaking under his weight, 
black burned-out klieg lights, the fine netting of spider 
webs struck to graphwork by the thin beams of sun.... 
‘Dust has drifted into corners, and over the remains of other 
sets: phony-gemiitlich love nests, slant-walled and palm- 
crowded nightclubs, papier-m4ché Wagnerian battlements, 
tenement courtyards in stark Expressionist white/black, 
built to no human scale, all tapered away in perspective 
for the rigid lenses that stared here once. Highlights are 
painted on to the sets, which is disturbing to Slothrop, 
who keeps finding these feeble yellow streaks, looking up 
sharply, then all around, for sources of light that were 
never there, getting more agitated as he prowls the old 
shell, the girders 50 feet overhead almost lost in shadows, 
tripping over his own echoes, sneezing from the dust he 
stirs. The Russians have pulled out all right, but Slothrop 


yy 


458 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


isn’t alone in here. He comes down a metal staircase 
through shredded webs, angry spiders and their dried 
prey, rust crunching under his soles, and at the bottom 
feels a sudden tug at his cape. Being still a little foggy 
from that injection, he only flinches violently. He is held 
by a gloved hand, the shiny kid stretched over precise 
little knuckles. A woman in a black Parisian frock, with a 
purple-and-yellow iris at her breast. Even damped by the 
velvet, Slothrop can feel the shaking of her hand. He 
stares into eyes rimmed soft a black ash, separate grains 
of powder on her face clear as pores the powder missed or 
was taken from by tears. This is how he comes to meet 
Margherita Erdmann, his lightless summer hearth, his safe- 
passage into memories of the Inflationszeit stained with 
dread—his child and his helpless Lisaura. 

She’s passing through: another of the million rootless. 
Looking for her daughter, Bianca, bound east for Swine- 
miinde, if the Russians and Poles will let her. She’s in 
Neubabelsberg on a sentimental side-trip—hasn’t seen the 
old studios in years. Through the twenties and thirties she 
worked as a movie actress, at Templehof and Staaken too, 
but this place was always her favorite. Here she was di- 
rected by the great Gerhardt von Goll through dozens of 
vaguely pornographic horror movies. “I knew he was a 
genius from the beginning. I was only his creature.” Never 
star material, she admits freely, no Dietrich, nor vamp a 
la Brigitte Helm. A touch of whatever it was they wanted, 
though—they. (Slothrop: “They?” Erdmann: “I don't 
know....”) nicknamed her the Anti-Dietrich: not de- 


stroyer of men but doll—languid, exhausted.... “I — 


watched all our films,” she recalls, “some of them six or 
seven times. I never seemed to move. Not even my face. 
Ach, those long, long gauze close-ups... it could have 
been the same frame, over and over. Even running away— 
I always had to be chased, by monsters, madmen, crimi- 
nals—still I was so—” bracelets flashing—‘stolid, so... 


monumental. When I wasn’t running I was usually — 


strapped or chained to something. Come. Ill show you.” 
Leading Slothrop now to what’s left of a torture chamber, 
wooden teeth snapped from its rack wheel, plaster masonry 


peeling and chipped, dust rising, dead torches cold and _ 
lopsided in their sconces. She lets wood chains, most of _ 


see 


In the Zone 459 


the silver paint worn away now, slither clattering through 
her kid fingers. “This was a set for Alpdriicken. Gerhardt 
in those days was still all for exaggerated lighting.” Silver- 
gray collects in the fine wrinkles of her gloves as she dusts 
off the rack, and lies down on it. “Like this,” raising her 
arms, insisting he fasten the tin manacles to her wrists and 
ankles. “The light came from above and below at the 
same time, so that everyone had two shadows: Cain’s and 
Abel’s, Gerhardt told us. It was at the height of his 
symbolist period. Later on he began to use more natural 
light, to shoot more on location.” They went to Paris, 
Vienna. To Herrenchiemsee, in the Bavarian Alps. Von 
Goll had dreamed of making, a film about Ludwig II. It 
nearly got him blacklisted. The rage then was all for 
Frederick. It was considered unpatriotic to say that a 
German ruler could also be a madman. But the gold, the 
mirrors, the miles of Baroque ornament drove von Goll 
himself a little daft. Especially those long corridors. ... 
“Corridor metaphysics,” is what the French call this condi- 
tion. Oldtime corridor hepcats will chuckle fondly at de- 
scriptions of von Géll, long after running out of film, still 
dollying with a boobish smile on his face down the golden 
vistas. Even on orthochromatic stock, the warmth of it 
survived in black and white, though the film was never 
released, of course. Das Wiitend Reich, how could they sit 
still for thatP Endless negotiating, natty little men with 
Nazi lapel pins trooping through, interrupting the shoot- 
ing, walking facefirst into the glass walls. They would 
have accepted anything for “Reich,” even “K6nigreich,” 
but von Goll stood fast. He walked a tightrope. To com- 
pensate he started immediately on Good Society, which it’s 
said delighted Goebbels so much he saw it three times, 
giggling and punching in the arm the fellow sitting next 
to him, who may have been Adolf Hitler. Margherita 
played the lesbian in the cafe, “the one with the monocle, 
who’s whipped to death at the end by the transvestite, 
remember?” Heavy legs in silk stockings now with a hard, 
machined look, slick knees sliding against each other as 
the memory moves in, exciting her. Slothrop too. She 
smiles up at his tautening deerskin crotch. “He was beauti- 
ful. Both ways, it didn’t matter. You remind me of him a 
little. Especially ... those boots.... Good Society was our 


460 Gravity's RaInsow 


second film, but this one,” this oneP “Alpdriicken, was our 
first. I think Bianca is his child. She was conceived. while 
we were filming this. He played the Grand Inquisitor who 
tortured me. Ah, we were the Reich’s Sweethearts—Greta 
Erdmann and Max Schlepzig, Wonderfully Together—” 

“Max Schlepzig,” repeats Slothrop, goggling, “quit fool- 
ing. Max Schlepzig?” 

“It wasn’t his real name. Erdmann wasn’t mine. But 
anything with Earth in it was politically safe—Earth, Soil, 
Folk...a code. Which they, staring, knew how to de- 
cipher.... Max had a very Jewish name, Something-sky, 
and Gerhardt thought it more prudent to give him a new 
one, 

“Greta, somebody also thought it prudent to name me 
Max Schlepzig.” He shows her the pass he got from Saure 
Bummer, 

She gazes at it, then at Slothrop briefly. She’s begun to 
tremble again. Some mixture of desire and fear. “I knew 
it.” 

“Knew what?” 

Looking away, submissive. “Knew he was dead. He dis- 
appeared in 38. They’ve been busy, haven’t They?” 

Slothrop has picked up, in the Zone, ‘enough about 
European passport-psychoses to want to comfort her. “This 
is forged. The name’s just a random alias, The guy whe 
made it probably remembered Schlepzig from-one of his 
movies.” 

“Random.” A tragic, actressy smile, beginnings of « 
double chin, one knee drawn up as far as these leg irons 
will let her. “Another fairy-tale word. The signature or 
your card is Max’s. Somewhere in Stefania’s house on the 
_ Vistula I have a steel box full of his letters. Don’t you 
think I know that Latin z, crossed engineer-style, the flowe1 
he made out of the g at the end? You could hunt all the 
Zone for your ‘forger.’ They wouldn’t let you find him 
They want you right here, right now.” 

Well. What happens when paranoid meets paranoid? A 
crossing of solipsisms, Clearly. The two patterns create ¢ 
third: a moiré, a new world of flowing shadows, inter. 
ferences. ... ““Want me here’? What for?” 

“For me.” Whispering out of scarlet lips, open, wet.. .. 
Hmm, Well, there’s this hardon, here. He sits on the rack 


In the Zone 461 


leans, kisses her, presently unlacing his trousers and peel- 

ing them down far enough to release his cock bounding 
up with a slight wobble into beni cool studio. “Put ie 
helmet on.” 

“Are: you very cruel?” 

“Don’t know.” 

“Could you be? Please. Find something to whip me 
with. Just a little. Just for the warmth.” Nostalgia. The 
pain of a return home. He rummages around through in- 
quisitional props, gyves, thumbscrews, leather hamess, be- 
fore coming up with a miniature cat-o’-nine-tails, a Black 
Forest elves’ whip, its lacquered black handle carved in a 
bas-relief orgy, the lashes padded with velvet to hurt but 
not to draw blood. “Yes, that’s perfect. Now on the insides 
of my thighs. . 

' But somebody has already educated him. Something. . 
that dreams Prussian and ‘wintering among their piwedown 
in whatever cursive lashmarks wait across the flesh of their 
sky so bleak, so incapable of any sheltering, wait to be 
summoned.... No. No—he still says “their,” but he 
knows better. His meadows now, his sky...his own 
cruelty. 

All Margherita’s chains and fetters are chiming, black 
skirt furled back to her waist, stockings pulled up tight in 
classic cusps by the suspenders of the boned black rig 
she’s wearing underneath. How the penises of Western 
men have leapt, for a century, to the sight of this singu- 
\lar point at the top of a lady’s stocking, this transition from 
silk to bare skin and suspender! It’s easy for non-fetishists 
to sneer about Pavlovian conditioning and let it go at that, 
but any underwear enthusiast worth his unwholesome 
giggle can tell you there is much more here—there is a 
cosmology: of nodes and cusps and points of osculation, 
mathematical kisses... singularities! Consider cathedral 
spires, holy minarets, the crunch of trainwheels over the 
points as you watch peeling away the track you didn’t 
take... mountain peaks rising sharply to heaven, such 
as those to be noted at scenic Berchtesgaden .. . the edges 
of steel razors, always holding potent oe . Tose 
thorns that prick us by surprise . . . even, according to the 
Russian mathematician Friedmann, the infinitely dense 


462, Graviry’s RaInsow 


point from which the present Universe expanded.... In 
each case, the change from point to no-point carries a 
luminosity and enigma at which something in us must 
leap and sing, or withdraw in fright. Watching the A4 
pointed at the sky—just before the last firing-switch 
closes—watching that singular point at the very top of the 
Rocket, where the fuze is.... Do all these points imply, 
like the Rocket’s, an annihilation? What is that, detonating 
in the sky above the cathedral? beneath the edge of the 
razor, under the rose? 

And what’s waiting for Slothrop, what unpleasant sur- 
prise, past the tops of Greta’s stockings here? laddering 
suddenly, the pallid streak flowing downthigh, over in- 
tricacies of knee and out of sight.... What waits past this 
whine and crack of velvet lashes against her skin, long red 
stripes on the white ground, her moans, the bruise-colored 
flower that cries at her breast, the jingling of the hard- 
ware holding her down? He tries not to tear his victim’s 
stockings, or whip too close to her stretched vulva, which 
shivers, unprotected, between thighs agape and straining, 
amid movements of muscle erotic, subdued, “monumental” 
as any silver memory of her body on film. She comes 


once, then perhaps again before Slothrop puts the whip 


down and climbs on top, covering her with the wings of 
his cape, her Schlepzig-surrogate, his latest reminder of 
Katje... and they commence fucking, the old phony rack 


groaning beneath them, Margherita whispering God how 


you hurt me and Ah, Max... and just as Slothrop’s about 
to come, the name of her child: strained through her per- 
fect teeth, a clear extrusion of pain that is not in play, she 
cries, Bianca.... 


O 


... yes, bitch—yes, little bitch—poor helpless bitch you're - 
coming can’t stop yourself now I'll whip you again till you. 


bleed. ... Thus Pékler’s whole front surface, eyes to knees: 
flooded with tonight’s image of the deliciqus victim bound 
on her dungeon rack, filling the movie screen—close-ups 


of her twisting face, nipples under the silk gown amaz- 


ingly erect, making lies of her announcements of pain— 


a f eA 


| In the Zone 463 
1 bitch! she loves it... and Leni no longer solemn wife, em- 
| bittered source of strength, but Margherita Erdmann un- 
| derneath him, on the bottom for a change, as Pékler drives 
_ in again, into her again, yes, bitch, yes... . 
_\ Only later did he try to pin down the time. Perverse 
| curiosity. Two weeks since her last period. He had come 
| out of the Ufa theatre on the Friedrichstrasse that night 
| with an erection, thinking like everybody else only about 
getting home, fucking somebody, fucking her into some 
|| submission. ... God, Erdmann was beautiful. How many 
_ other men, shuffling out again into depression Berlin, car- 
_ ried the same image back from Alpdriicken to some drab 
_ fat excuse for a bride? How many shadow-children would 
| be fathered on Erdmann that night? 
__ It was never a real possibility for Pékler that Leni might 
| get pregnant. But looking back, he knew that had to be 
| ‘ the night, Alpdriicken night, that Ilse was conceived. They 
| fucked so seldom any more. It was not hard to pinpoint. 
_ That's how it happened. A film. How else? Isn’t that what 
_ they made of my child, a film? 
_ He sits tonight by his driftwood fire in the cellar of the 
_ onion-topped Nikolaikirche, listening to the sea. Stars hang 
_ among the spaces of the great Wheel, precarious to him 
as candles and good-night cigarettes. Cold gathers along 
_ the strand. Child phantoms—white whistling, tears never 
. to come, range the wind behind the wall. Twists of faded 
‘€repe paper blow along the ground, scuttling over his old 
shoes. Dust, under a moon’ newly calved, twinkles like 
snow, and the Baltic crawls like its mother-glacier. His 
heart shrugs in its’ scarlet net, elastic, full of expectation. 
_He’s waiting for Ilse, for his movie-child, to return to 
Zwolfkinder, as she has every summer at this time. 
Storks are asleep among two- and three-legged horses, 
rusted gearwork and splintered roof of the carousel, their 
heads jittering with air-currents and yellow Africa, dainty 
black snakes a hundred feet below meandering in the sun- 
light across the rocks and dry pans. Oversize crystals of 
Salt lie graying, drifted in the cracks of the pavement, in 
wrinkles of the dog with saucer eyes in front of the 
‘town hall, the beard of the goat on the bridge, the mouth 
“of the troll below. Frieda the pig hunts a new place to 
nestle and snooze out of the wind. The plaster witch, wire 


KY 
Pe 
— : 


464 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


mesh visible at her breasts and haunches, leans near the 
oven, her poke at corroded Hansel in perpetual arrest. 
Gretel’s eyes lock wide open, never a blink, crystal-heavy 
lashes batting at the landings of guerrilla winds from the 
sea. 

If there is music for this it’s windy strings and reed 
sections standing in bright shirt fronts and black ties all 
along the beach, a robed organist by the breakwater—itself 
broken, crusted with tides—whose languets and flues 
gather and shape the resonant spooks here, the candle- 
flame memories, all trace, particle and wave, of the sixty 
thousand who passed, already listed for taking, once or 
twice this way. Did you ever go on holiday to Zwélfkinder? 
Did you hold your father’s hand as you rode the train up 
from Liibeck, gaze at your knees or at the other children 
like you braided, ironed, smelling of bleach, boot-wax, 
caramel? Did small-change jingle in your purse as you 
swung around the Wheel, did you hide your face in his 
wool lapels or did you kneel up in the seat, looking over 
the water, trying to see Denmark? Were you frightened 
when the dwarf tried to hug you, was your frock scratchy 
in the warming afternoon, what did you say, what did you 
feel when boys ran by snatching each other’s caps and,too 
busy for you? 

She must have always been a child on somebody’s list. 
He only avoided thinking about it. But all the time she 
was carrying her disappearance in her drawn face, her 
reluctant walk, and if he hadn’t needed her protection so 
much he might have seen in time how little she could 
protect anything, even their mean nest. He couldn’t talk 
to her—it was arguing with his own ghost from ten years 
ago, the same idealism, the adolescent fury—items that 
had charmed him once—a woman with spiritl—but which 
he came to see as evidence of her single-mindedness, even, 
he could swear, some desire to be actually destroyed.... 

She went out to her street-theatre each time expecting 
not to come back, but he never really knew that. Leftists 
and Jews in the streets, all right, noisy, unpleasant to look 
at, but the police will keep them channeled, she’s in no 
danger unless she wants to be. ... Later, after she left, he 
got a little drunk one forenoon, a little sentimental, and 
went out at last, his first and last time, hoping that some- 


In the Zone 465 


how the pressures of Fate or crowd hydrodynamics might 
bring them together again. He found a street full of tan 
and green uniforms, truncheons, leather, placards fluttering 
unstable in all modes but longitudinal, scores of panicked 
civilians. A policeman aimed a blow at him, but Pokler 
‘dodged, and it hit an old man instead, some bearded old 
unreconstructed geezer of a Trotskyite...he saw the 
‘strands of steels cable under black rubber skin, a finicky 
smile on the policeman’s face as he swung, his free hand 
‘grasping his opposite lapel in some feminine way, the 
leather glove of the hand with the truncheon unbuttoned 
at the wrist, and his eyes flinching at the last possible 
moment, as if the truncheon shared his nerves and might 
get hurt against the old man’s skull. Pékler made it to a 
doorway, sick with fear. Other police came running as 
some dancers run, elbows close to sides, forearms thrusting. - 
‘out at an angle. They used firehoses to break up the 
crowd, finally. Women slid like dolls along the: slick 
cobbles and on tram rails, the thick gush catching them by 
belly and head, its brute white vector dominating them. 
Any of them might have been Leni. Pokler shivered in his 
doorway and watched it. He couldn’t go out in the street. 
Later he thought about its texture, the network of grooves 
beween the paving stones. The only safety there was ant- 
scaled, down and running the streets of Ant City, boot- 
soles crashing overhead like black thunder, you and your 
crawling neighbors in traffic all silent, jostling, heading 
‘down the gray darkening streets..... Pékler knew how to 
find safety among the indoor abscissas and ordinates of 
‘graphs: finding the points he needed not by running the 
curve itself, not up on high stone and vulnerability, but 
instead tracing patiently the xs and ys, P (ati), W 
(m/sec), Ti (° K), moving always by safe right angles 
along the faint lines. ... 

When he began to dream about the Rocket with some 
frequency, it would sometimes not be a literal rocket at all, 
but a street he knew was in a certain district of the city, 
a street on a certain small area of the grid that held some-. 
thing he thought he needed. The coordinates were clear 
in his mind, but the street eluded him. Over the years, as 
the Rocket neared its fullness, about to go operational, the 
coordinates switched from the Cartesian x and y of the 


) 


pa 


466 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


laboratory to the polar azimuth and range of the weapon 
as deployed: once he knelt on the lavatory floor of his old 
rooming house in Munich, understanding that if he faced 
exactly along a certain compass-bearing his prayer would 
be heard: he’d be safe. He wore a robe of gold and 
orange brocade, It was the only light in the room. After- 
ward he ventured out into the house, knowing people 
slept in all the rooms, but feeling a sense of desertion. He 
went to switch on a light—but in the act of throwing the 
switch he knew the room had really been lit to begin with, 
and he had just turned everything out, everything. ... 

The A4 operational-at-last hadn’t crept up on him. Its 
coming true was no climax. That hadn’t ever been the 
point. 

“They're using you to kill people,” Leni told him, as 
clearly as she could. “That’s their only job, and you're 
helping them.” 

or all use it, someday, to leave the earth. To tran- 
scend.” 

She laughed. “Transcend,” from Pékler? 

“Someday,” honestly trying, “they won’t have to kill. 
Borders won't mean anything. We'll have all i 
space. . 

“Oh you re blind,” spitting it as she spat his Blaidwsus at 
him every day, that and “Kadavergehorsamkeit,” a beauti- 
ful word he can no longer imagine in any voice but 
hers. . 

But really he did not obey like a corpse. He was politi- 
cal, up to a point—there was politics enough out at the 
rocket field. The Army Weapons Department was showing 
an ever-quickening interest in the amateur rocketeers of 
the Verein fiir Raumschiffahrt, and the VfR had recently 
begun making available to the Army records of their ex- 
periments. The corporations and the universities—the 
Army said—didn’t want to risk capital or manpower on 
developing anything as fantastic as a rocket. The Army 
had nowhere to turn but to private invéntors and clubs 
like the VFR. 

“Shit,” said Leni. “They’ re all in on : together. You 

really can’t see that, can you.” 
' Within the Society, the lines were Puen clear ensieltl 
Without money the VfR was suffocating—the Army had 


In the Zone » 467 


the money, and was already financing them in round- 
about ways. The choice was between building what the 
Army wanted—practical hardware—or pushing on in 

chronic poverty, dreaming of expeditions to Venus. 

“Where do you think the Army’s getting the money?” 
Leni asked. ~ 

“What does it matterP Money is money.” 

“Nol” 

Major Weissmann was one of several gray eminences 
around the rocket field, able to talk, with every appear- 
ance of sympathy and reason, to organized thinker and 
maniac idealist alike. All things to all men, a brand-new 
military type, part salesman, part scientist. Pokler, the 
all-seeing, the unmoving, must have known that what 
went on in the VfR committee meetings was the same 
game being played in Leni’s violent and shelterless street. 
All his training had encouraged an eye for analogies—in 
equations, in theoretical models—yet he persisted in think- 
ing the VfR was special, preserved against the time. And 
he also knew at first hand what happens to dreams with 
no money to support them. So, presently, Pékler found 
that by refusing to take sides, he’d become Weissmann’s 
best ally. The major’s eyes always changed when he 
looked at Pékler: his slightly prissy face to relax into what 
Pékler had noticed, in random mirrors and display win- 
dows, on his own face when he was with Leni. The blank 
look of one who is taking another for granted. Weissmann 
was as sure of Pokler’s role as Pékler was of Leni’s. But 
| Leni left at last. Pékler might not have had the will. 

He thought of himself as a practical man. At the rocket 
field they talked continents, encirclements—seeing years 
‘before the General Staff the need for a weapon to break 
ententes, to leap like a chess knight over Panzers, infantry, 
even the Luftwaffe. Plutocratic nations to the west, com- 
munists to the east. Spaces, models, game-strategies. Not 
much passion or ideology. Practical men, While the mili- 
tary wallowed in victories not yet won, the rocket engi- 
neers had to think non-fanatically, about German reverses, 
‘German defeat—the attrition of the Luftwaffe and its de- 
cline in power, the withdrawals of fronts, the need for 
weapons with longer ranges.... But others had the 
money, others gave the orders—trying to superimpose their 


Ty 


Me k 
Shed 
| 


468 Gravity’s Rainsow 


lusts and bickerings on something that had its own vitality, 
on a technologique they'd never begin to understand. As 
long as the Rocket was in research and development, there 
was no need for them to believe in it. Later, as the A4 
was going operational, as they found themselves with a 
real rocket-in-being, the struggles for power would begin 
in earnest. Pékler could see that. They were athletic, brain- 
less men without vision, without imagination. But they 
had power, and it was hard for him not to think of them 
as superior, even while holding them in a certain con- 
tempt. 

But Leni was wrong: no one was using him. Pékler was 
an extension of the Rocket, long before it was ever built. 
She’d seen to that. When she left him, he fell apart. Pieces 
spilled into the Hinterhof, down the drains, away in the 
wind. He couldn’t even go to the movies. Only rarely did 
he go out after work and try to fish lumps of coal from 
the Spree. He drank beer and sat in the cold room, autumn 
light reaching him after impoverishments and fadings, 
from gray clouds, off courtyard walls and drainpipes, 
through grease-darkened curtains, bled of all hope by the 
time it reached where he sat shivering and crying. He 
cried every day, some hour of the day, for a‘ month, till a 
sinus got infected. He went to bed and sweated the fever 
out. Then he moved to Kummersdorf, outside Berlin, to 
help his friend Mondaugen at the rocket field. 

Temperatures, velocities, pressures, fin and body con- 
figurations, stabilities and turbulences began to slip in, to 
replace what Leni had run away from. There were pine 
and fir forests out the windows in the morning, instead of 
a sorrowful city courtyard. Was he giving up the world, 
entering a monastic order? 

One night he set fire to twenty pages of calculations. 
Integral signs weaved like charmed cobras, comical curly 
ds marched along like hunchbacks ‘through the fire-edge 
into billows of lace ash. But that was his only relapse. 

At first he helped out in the propulsion group: No one 
was specializing yet. That came later, when the bureaus 
and paranoias moved in, and the organization charts be- 
came plan-views of prison cells. Kurt Mondaugen, whose 
field was radio electronics, could come up with solutions 
to cooling problems. Pékler found himself redesigning \in- 


In the Zone 469 


strumentation for measuring local pressures. That came in 
handy later at Peenemiinde, when they often had to lead 
over a hundred measuring tubes from a model no more 
than 4 or 5, centimeters’ diameter. Pékler helped in work- 
ing out the Halbmodelle solution: bisecting the model 
lengthwise and mounting it flat-side to the wall of the 
test chamber, bringing the tubes through that way to all 
the manometers outside. A Berlin slum-dweller, he thought, 
knew how to think in half-rations... but it was a rare 
moment of pride. No one could really claim credit 100% 
for any idea, it was a corporate intelligence at work, spe- 
cialization hardly mattered, class lines even less. The 
social spectrum ran from von Braun, the Prussian aristo- 
crat, down to the likes of Pékler, who would eat an apple 
in the street—yet they were all equally at the Rocket’s 
mercy: not only danger from explosions or falling hard- 

_ ware, but also its dumbness, its dead weight, its obstinate 
and palpable mystery. ... 

In those days, most of the funding and attention went 
to the propulsion group. Problem was just to get something 
off the ground without having it blow up. There were 
minor disasters—aluminum motor casings would bum 
through, some injector designs would set up resonant 
combustion, in which the burning motor would try to 
shriek itself to pieces—and then, in 34, a major one, Dr. 
Wahmke decided to mix peroxide and alcohol together 
before injection into the thrust chamber, to see what would 

happen. The ignition flame backed up through the conduit 
_ into the tank. The blast demolished the test stand, killing 
Dr. Wahmke and two others. First blood, first sacrifice. 
Kurt Mondaugen took it as a sign. One of these German ~ 
_ mystics who grew up reading Hesse, Stefan George, and 
Richard Wilhelm, ready to accept Hitler on the basis of 
Demian-metaphysics, he seemed to look at fuel and oxi- 
dizer as paired opposites, male and female principles unit- 
ing in the mystical egg of the combustion chamber: crea- 
tion and destruction, fire and water, chemical plus and 
chemical minus— 
_“Valency,” Pékler protested, “a condition of the outer 
Shells, that’s all.” 

“Think about it,” said Mondaugen. 

__ There was also Fahringer, an aerodynamics man, who ~ 


1 


hea 


470 Gravity's RAInBow 


went out in the pine woods at Peenemiinde with his Zen 
bow and roll of pressed straw to practice breathing, draw 
and loosing, over and over. It seemed rather rude at a 
time when his colleagues were being driven insane by 
what they called “Folgsamkeitfaktor,” a problem with 
getting the Rocket’s long axis to follow the tangent, at all 
points, to its trajectory. The Rocket for this Fahringer was 
a fat Japanese arrow. It was necessary in some way to be- 
come one with Rocket, trajectory, and target—“not to will 
it, but to surrender, to step out of the role of firer. The act 
is undivided. You are both aggressor and victim, rocket 
and parabolic path and...” Pékler never knew what the 
man was talking about. But Mondaugen understood. Mond- 
augen was the bodhisattva here, returned from exile in 
the Kalahari and whatever light had found him there, re- 
turned to the world of men and nations to carry on in a 
role he’d chosen deliberately, but without ever explaining 
why. In Siidwest he had kept no journals, written no let- 
ters home. There had been an uprising by the Bondel- 
swaartz in 1922, and general turmoil in the country. His 
radio experiments interrupted, he sought refuge, along with 
a few score other whites, in the villa of a local landowner 
named Foppl. The place was a stronghold, cut off on all 
sides by deep ravines. After a few months of siege and 
debauchery, “haunted by a profound disgust for every- 
thing European,” Mondaugen went out alone into the 
bush, ended up living with the Ovatjimba, the aardvark 
people, who are the -poorest of the Hereros. They ac- 
cepted him with no questions. He thought of himself, 
there and here, as a radio transmitter of some kind, and 
believed that whatever he was broadcasting at the time 
was at least no threat to them. In his electro-mysticism, the 
triode was as basic as the cross in Christianity. Think of 
the ego, the self that suffers a personal history bound to 
time, as the grid. The deeper and true Self is the flow 
between cathode and plate. The constant, pure flow. Sig- 
nals—sense-data, feelings, memories relocating—are put 
onto the grid, and modulate the flow. We live lives that 
are waveforms constantly changing with time, now posi- 
tive, now negative. Only at moments of great serenity is 
it possible to find the pure, the informationless state of 
signal zero. ° ' 


«In the Zone .: 471 


“In the name of the cathode, the anode, and the holy 
grid?” said Pokler. : 

“Yes, that’s good,” Mondaugen smiled. 

Closest to the zero among them all, perhaps, was the 
African Enzian, the protégé of Major Weissmann. At the 
Versuchsanstalt, behind his back, he was known as Weiss- 
mann’s Monster, probably less out of racism than at the 
picture the two of them made, Enzian towering a foot 
over Weissmann, who was balding, scholarly, peering up 
at the African through eyeglass lenses thick as bottles, 
skipping now and then to keep up as they stalked over 
the asphalt and through the labs and: offices, Enzian 
dominating every room and landscape of those early 
Rocket days.... Pdkler’s clearest memory of him is his 
first, in the testing room at Kummersdorf, surrounded by 
electric colors—green nitrogen bottles, a thick tangle of 
‘red, yellow and blue plumbing, Enzian’s own copper face 
with the same kind of serenity that now and then drifted 
into Mondaugen’s—watching in one of the mirrors the 
image of a rocket engine beyond the safety partition: in’ 
the stale air of that room snapping with last-minute anxie- 
ties, nicotine craving, unreasonable prayer, Enzian was 
peace.... 

Pokler moved to Peenemiinde in 1937, along with some 
go others. They were invading Gravity itself, and a beach- 
head had to be laid down. Never in his life, not even as a 
laborer in Berlin, did Pékler work so hard. The vanguard 
spent the spring and summer converting a little island, the 
_Greifswalder Oie, into a testing station: resurfacing road, 
‘stringing cable and telephone line, putting up living quar- 
ters, latrines and storage sheds, excavating bunkers, mix- 
ing concrete, endlessly stevedoring in crates of tools, bags 
of cement, drums of fuel, They used an ancient ferryboat 
for cargo runs between the mainland and the Oie. Pékler 
remembers the worn red plush and scratched lacquer in- 
side the dim cabins, the neglected brightwork, the asth- 
matic cry of her steam-whistle, odors of sweat, cigarette 
smoke and Diesel fuel, the trembling of arm and leg 
mouscles, the tired joking, the exhaustion toward the end 
of each day, his own new calluses struck to gold by the 
The sea was mostly calm and blue that summer, but in 


472 Gravity's RAINBOW 


the autumn the weather turned. Rain swept in from the 
north, the temperature plunged, wind tore into storage 
tents, giant waves boomed all night long. The water was 
white for fifty meters out from shore. Spray feathered land- 
ward off the curls of the big breakers, Pékler, billeted at a 
fisherman’s cottage, came in from his evening walks be- 
hind a fine mask of salt. Lot’s wife. What disaster had he 
dared to look back on? He knew. 

He reverted that season to childhood, to the wounded 
dog. During those wet and solitary walks he brooded 
about Leni: he concocted scenarios in which they would 
meet again, in some elegant or dramatic setting—aministry, 
theatre lobby—two or three jeweled and beautiful women 
hanging to him, generals and industrialists springing to 
light his American cigarettes and listening to his offhand 
solutions to problems Leni would only vaguely under- 
stand, The most satisfying of these fantasies would come 
while Pékler was on the toilet—he’d tap his feet, fanfares 
would whisper through his lips as he felt that pleasant 
anticipation. ... 

But the burden of his poor Berlin self lingered. He had 
spoken of it, listened, probed, and yet it would not dissolve 
or flee, it persisted, beggar in all the doorways of his life, 
beseeching silently with eyes, with hands quite sure of 
their guiltmaking craft. Busywork at Peenemiinde and 
good company at Herr Halliger’s inn on the Oie—all 
marking time till good firing weather—and Pokler more 
vulnerable than he’d ever been. His cold and womanless 
nights, the card and chess games, the all-male beer-drinking 
sessions, the nightmares he had to find his own way up 
out of because there was no other hand now to shake him 
awake, nobody to hold him when the shadows came on 
the window shade—all caught up with him that Novem- 
ber, and maybe he allowed it to. A protective reflex. Be- 
cause something scary was happening. Because once or 
twice, deep in the ephedrine pre-dawns nodding ja, ja, 
stimmt, ja, for some design you were carrying not in but 
on your head and could feel bobbing, out past your side- 
vision, bobbing and balanced almost—he ould become 
aware of a drifting-away...some assumption of Pékler 
into the calculations, drawings, graphs, and even what raw 
hardware there was...each time, soon as it happened, he 


< 


In the Zone 473 


would panic, and draw back into the redoubt of waking 
Pokler, heart pounding, hands and feet aching, his breath 
catching in a small voiced hunh— Something was out to 
get him, something here, among the paper. The fear of 
extinction named Pékler knew it was the Rocket, beckon- 
ing him in. If he also knew that in something like this 
extinction he could be free of his loneliness and his failure, 
still he wasn’t quite convinced. . . . So he hunted, as a servo 
valve with a noisy input will, across the Zero, between the 
two desires, personal identity and impersonal salvation. 
Mondaugen saw it all. He could see into Pékler’s heart. In 
his compassion, not surprisingly, he had no free advice for 
his friend. Pékler would have to find his own way to his 
zero signal, his true course. 

By ’*38 the Peenemiinde facility was taking shape, and 
Pékler moved over to the mainland. With hardly more to 
‘go on than Stodda’s treatise on steam turbines, and help- 
ful data now and then from universities at Hannover, 
Darmstadt, Leipzig and Dresden, the propulsion group 
were testing a rocket engine of 114 tons’ thrust, 10 atmo- | 
spheres’ combustion pressure, and 60 seconds’ duration. 
They were getting exhaust velocities of 1800 meters per 
second, but the value they were aiming for was 2000. 
They called it the magic number, and they meant it lit- 
erally. As some gamblers on the stock market know when 
to place stop orders, feeling by instinct not the printed 
numbers but the rates of change, knowing from first and 
second derivatives in their skin when to come in, stay or 
go, so there are engineering reflexes tuned always to know, 
at any moment, what, given the resources, can be em- 
bodied in working hardware—what is “feasible.” On the 
‘day that a 2000 m/sec exhaust became feasible, the A4 
itself suddenly came in reach. The danger then lay in 
being seduced by approaches that were too sophisticated. 
No one was immune. Hardly a designer there, including 
Pokler, didn’t come up with at least one monster rig, some 
Gorgon’s head writhing with pipes, tubes, complicated 
folderol for controlling pressures, solenoids on top of pilot 
valves on auxiliary valves on backup valves—hundreds of 
Pages on valve nomenclature were printed as appendices 
‘to these weird proposals, all promising huge pressure differ- 
ences between the inside of the chamber and the nozzle 


474 Gravity's RAINBOW 


exit—beautiful, as long as you didn’t care much about 
those millions of moving parts behaving together too 
reliably. But to get a dependable working motor, one the 
military could use in the field to kill people, the real 
engineering problem now was to keep things as simple as 
possible. 

The model currently being fired was the A3, christened 
not with champagne, but with flasks of liquid oxygen by 
the playful technicians. Emphasis had begun to shift from 
propulsion to guidance. Telemetry on the flight tests was 
still primitive. Thermometers and barometers were sealed 
in a watertight compartment with a movie camera. During 
flights the camera photographed the needles swinging on 
the gauges. After the flight the film was recovered, and 
the data played back. Engineers sat around looking at 
movies of dials. Meantime Heinkels were also dropping 
iron models of the Rocket from 20,000 feet. The fall was 
photographed by Askania cinetheodolite rigs on the 
ground. In the daily rushes you would watch the frames 
at around 3000 feet, where the model broke through the 
speed of sound. There has been this strange connection 
between the German mind and the rapid flashing of suc- 
cessive stills to counterfeit movement, for \at least two 
centuries—since Leibniz, in the process of inventing cal- 
culus, used the same approach to break up the trajectories 
of cannonballs through the air. And now Pékler was about 
to be given proof that these techniques had been extended 
past images on film, to human lives. 

He had returned to his quarters about sundown, too 
tired or preoccupied to be much affected by the furnace 
of colors in the flower gardens, the daily changes to the 
skyline of the Station, even the absence of noise today 
from the testing stands. He smelled the ocean, and could — 
almost imagine himself as someone who lives year-round 
at a seaside resort, but seldom gets to the beach. Now 
and then, over in Peenemiinde-West, a fighter plane took 
off or landed, the motors softened. by distance to tranquil 
purring, A late sea-breeze flickered. He had no warning 
other than a smile from a colleague who lived a few 
cubicles away and was coming down the barracks stairs as 
Pékler was going up. He entered his own cubicle and saw © 
her sitting on the bed, her toes pointed in next to a flow- 


We 


In the Zone A75 


ered carpetbag, skirt pulled over her knees and eyes 
anxiously, fatally, looking into his. 

“Herr Pékler? I am your—” 

“Tlse. Ilse... .” 

He must have picked her up, kissed her, drawn the cur- 
tain. Some reflex. She was wearing in her hair a ribbon 
of brown velvet. He remembered her hair as lighter, 
shorter—but then it does grow, and darken. He looked 
slantwise into her face, all his emptiness echoing. The vac- 
uum of his life threatened to be broken in one strong inrush 


/ -of love. He tried to maintain it with seals of suspicion, look- 


ing for resemblances to the face he’d last seen years ago 


over her mother’s shoulder, eyes still puffy from sleep 
angled down across Leni’s raincoated back, going out a 
door he’d thought closed for good—pretending not to find 
resemblances. Perhaps pretending. Was it really the same 
faceP he’d lost so much of it over the years, that fat, 


' featureless child’s face.... He was afraid now even to 


hold her, afraid his heart would burst. He said, “How long 
have you been waiting?” 

“Since lunchtime.” She’d eaten in the -canteen. Major 
Weissmann had brought her up on the train from Stettin, 
and they had played chess. Major Weissmann was a slow 
player, and they hadn’t finished the game. Major Weiss- 
mann had bought her sweets, and had asked her to say 
hello and sorry he couldn’t stay long enough to see 
Pékler— 

Weissmann? What was this? A blinking, tentative fury 
grew in Pokler. They must have known everything—all 
this time. His life was secretless as this mean cubicle, with 
its bed, commode and reading-light. 

So, to stand between him and this impossible return, he 


chad his anger—to preserve him from love he couldn't 


really risk. He could settle for interrogating his daughter. 
The shame he felt was acceptable, the shame and cold- 
ness. But she must have picked it up, for she sat now 


very still, except for nervous feet, her voice so subdued he 


missed parts of her answers. 
They had sent her here from a place in the mountains, 
where it was chilly even in summer—surrounded by 


barbed wire and bright hooded lights that burned all 


night long. There were no boys—only girls, mothers, old 


476 Gravity's RaInsow 


ladies living in barracks, stacked up in bunks, often two 
to a pallet. Leni was well. Sometimes a man in a black 
uniform came into the barracks and Mutti would go away 
with him, and stay away for several days. When she came 
back she didn’t want to talk, or even to hug Ilse the way 
she usually did. Sometimes she cried, and asked Ilse to 
leave her alone. Ilse would go off and play with Johanna 
and Lilli underneath the barracks next door. They had 
scooped a hideout there in the dirt, fumished with dolls, 
hats, dresses, shoes, old bottles, magazines with pictures, 
all found out near the barbed wire, the treasure pile, they 
called it, a huge refuse dump that always smoldered, day 
and night: you could see its red glow out the window from 
the top bunk where she slept with Lilli, nights when Leni 
was away.. 

But Pékler was hardly listening: he had the only datum 
with any value: that she was somewhere definite, with a 
location on the map and authorities who might be con- 
tacted. Could he find her again? Fool. Could he somehow 
negotiate her release? Some man, some Red, must have 
got her into this. . 

Kurt Mondaugen was the only one he could trust, 
though Pékler knew before they spoke that the role Mond- 
augen had chosen would keep him from helping. “They 
call them re-education camps. They’re run by the SS. I 
could talk to Weissmann, but it might not work.” 

He had known Weissmann in Siidwest. They had shaved 
the months of siege inside Foppl’s villa: Weissmann was 
one of the people who had driven Mondaugen, finally, 
away to live in the bush. But they had found a rapproche- 
ment here, among the rockets, either for sunblasted holy- 
man reasons it was not for Pékler to understand or because 
of some deeper connection which had agi been 

ere. 

They stood on the roof of one of thé bacaathiy besides: 
the Oie across the water six miles away clearly visible, 
_ which meant a change in the weather tomorrow. Steel was 
being hammered somewhere out in the sunlight, ham- 
mered in cadences, purified as the song of some bird. Blue 
Peenemiinde shivered around them in directions, a 
dream of concrete and steel masses reflecting the noon 
heat. The air rippled like camouflage. Behind it ee 


In the Zone 477 


else’ seemed to carry on in secret. At any moment the 
illusion they stood on would dissolve and they would fall 
to earth. Pékler stared across the marshes, feeling helpless. 
“T have to do something. Don’t I?” 

“No. You have to wait.” 

“It’s not right, Mondaugen.” 

“N. ar” 

“What about Ilse? Will she have to go back?” 

“I don’t know. But she’s here now.” 

So, as usual, Pékler chose silence. Had he chosen some- 


| thing else, back while there was time, they all might have 


saved themselves. Even left the country. Now, too late, 
when at last he wanted to act, there was nothing to act on. 

Well, to be honest, he didn’t spend much time brooding 
about past neutralities. He wasn’t that sure he’d outgrown 
them, anyway. 

They took walks, he and Ilse, by the stormy shore—fed 
ducks, explored the pine forests. They even allowed her 
to watch a launching. It was a message to him, but he 
didn’t understand till later what it meant. It meant that 
there was no violation of security: there was no one she 
could tell who mattered. The noise of the Rocket ripped 
at them. For the first time then she moved close, and held 
him. He felt that he was holding on to her. The motor cut 
off too soon, and the Rocket crashed somewhere over in 
Peenemiinde-West, in Luftwaffe territory. The dirty pillar 
of smoke drew the screaming fire engines and truckloads 
of workers by in a wild parade. She took in a deep breath, 
and squeezed his hand. “Did you make it do that, Papi?” 

“No, it wasn’t supposed to. It’s supposed to fly in a big 


curve,” motioning with his hand, the parabola trailing 
_ behind encompassing testing stands, assembly buildings, 


drawing them together as the crosses priests make in the 
9 quarter and divide the staring congregations behind 
em. ... 
“Where does it go?” 
_ “Wherever we tell it to.” 
“May I fly in it someday? Id fit inside, wouldn’t IP” 
She asked impossible questions. “Someday,” Pékler told 


__ her. “Perhaps someday to the Moon.” 


“The Moon...” as if he were going to tell her a story. 


- When none followed she made up her own. The engineer 


478 Gravity’s RaInsow 


in the next cubicle had a map of the Moon tacked to his 
fiberboard wall, and she spent hours studying it, deciding 
where she wanted to live. Passing over the bright rays of 
Kepler, the rugged solitude of the Southern Highlands; the 
spectacular views at Copernicus and: Eratosthenes, she 
chose a small pretty crater in the Sea of Tranquillity called 
Maskelyne B. They would build a house right on the rim, 
Mutti and she and Pékler, gold mountains out one window 
and the wide sea out the other, And Earth green and blue 
in the sky.... 

Should he have told her what the “seas” of the Moon 
really were? Told her there was nothing to breathe? His 
ignorance frightened him, his ineptitude as a father.... 
Nights in the cubicle, with Ilse curled a few feet away in 
a canvas army cot, a little gray squirrel under her blanket, 
he’d wonder if she wasn’t really better off as ward of the 
Reich. He’d heard there were camps, but saw nothing 
sinister in it: he took the Government at their word, “re- 
education.” I’ve made such a mess of everything... they 
have qualified people there...trained personnel... they 
know what a child needs... staring up at the electric 
scatter from this part of Peenemiinde mapping across his 
piece of ceiling priorities, abandoned dreams, favor in the 
eyes of the master fantasists in Berlin, while sometimes Ilse 
whispered to him bedtime ‘stories. about the moon she 
would live on, till he had transferred silently to a world 
that wasn’t this one after all: a map without any national 
borders, insecure and exhilarating, in which flight was as 
natural as breathing—but I'll fall . . . no, rising, look down, 
nothing to be afraid of, this time it’s’ good... yes, firmly 
in flight, it’s working...yes.... © © 

Pokler may be only witnessing tonight—or he may really - 
be part of it. He hasn’t been shown which it is. Look at 
this. There is about to be expedited, for Friedrich August 
Kekulé von Stradonitz, his dream of 1865, the great Dream 
that revolutionized chemistry and made the IG possible. 
So that the right material may find its way to the right 
dreamer, everyone, everything involved must be exactly 
in place in the pattern. It was nice of Jung to give us the 
idea of an ancestral pool in which everybody shares the 
same dream material. But how it is we are each visited as 
individuals, each by exactly and only what he needs? 


In the Zone 479 


- Doesn’t that imply a switching-path of some kind? a 


bureaucracy? Why shouldn’t the IG go to séances? They 
ought to be quite at home with the bureaucracies of the 
other side. Kekulé’s dream here’s being routed now past 
points which may arc through the silence, in bright reluc- 
tance to live inside the moving moment, an imperfect, a 
human light, over here interfering with the solemn binary 
decisions of these agents, who are now allowing the cosmic 
Serpent, in the violet splendor of its scales, shining that is 
definitely not human, to pass—without feeling, without 


' wonder (after. you get a little time in—whatever that 


, means over here—one of these archetypes gets to. look 
pretty much like any other, oh you hear some of these new 
hires, the seersucker crowd come in the first day, “Wow! 
Hey—that’s th-th’ Tree o Creation! Huh? Ain't itl 
Je-eepers!” but they calm down fast enough, pick up the 
reflexes for Intent to Gawk, you know self-criticism’s an 
amazing technique, it shouldn’t work but it does... .) Here, 
here’s the rundown on Kekulé’s problem. Started out to 
become an architect, tured out instead to be one of the 
Atlantes of chemistry, most of the organic wing of that 
useful edifice bearing down on top of his head forever— 
not just under the aspect of IG, but of World, assuming 


that’s a distinction you observe, heh, heh. ... Once again 


it was the influence of Liebig, the great professor of chem- 
istry on whose name-street in Munich Pokler lived while 
he attended the T.H. Liebig was at the University of 
Giessen when Kekulé entered as a student. He inspired the 
young man to change his field. So Kekulé brought the 
mind’s eye of an architect over into chemistry. It was a 
critical switch. Liebig himself seems to have occupied the 


. Tole of a gate, or sorting-demon such as his younger con- 


temporary Clerk Maxwell once proposed, helping to con- 
centrate. energy into one favored room of the Creation at 
the expense of everything else (later witnesses have sug- 
gested that Clerk Maxwell intended his Demon not so 
much as convenience in discussing a thermodynamic idea 
as a parable about the actual existence of personnel like 
Liebig ... We may gain an indication of how far the re- 
pression had.grown by that time, in the degree to Ss 


|) Clerk Maxwell felt obliged to code | his warnings . 


> deed some theorists, usually the ones who find api: 


480 Gravity’s Rainsow 


meaning behind even Mrs. Clerk Maxwell’s notorious “It 
is time to go home, James, you are beginning to enjoy 
yourself,” have made the extreme suggestion that the Field 
Equations themselves contain an ominous forewarning— 
they cite as evidence the disturbing intimacy of the Equa- 
tions with the behavior of the double-integrating circuit in 
the guidance system of the A4 rocket, the same double- 
summing of current densities-that led architect Etzel Olsch 
to design for architect Albert Speer an underground fac- 
tory at Nordhausen with just that symbolic shape. ..). 
Young ex-architect Kekulé went looking among the mole- 
cules of the time for the hidden shapes he knew were 
there, shapes he did not like to think of as real physical 
structures, but as “rational formulas,” showing the relation- 
ships that went on in “metamorphoses,” his quaint 19th- 
century way of saying “chemical reactions.” But he could 
visualize; He saw the four bonds of carbon, lying in a tetra- 
hedron—he showed how carbon atoms could link up one 
to another, into long chains. ... But he was stumped when 
he got to benzene. He knew there were six carbon atoms 
with a hydrogen attached to each one—but he could not 
see the shape. Not until the dream: until he was made to 
see it, so that others might be seduced by its physical 
beauty, and begin to think of it as a blueprint, a basis tor 
new compounds, new arrangements, so that there would 
be a field of aromatic chemistry to ally itself with secular 
power, and find new methods of synthesis, so there would 
be a German dye industry to become the IG... +. 

Kekulé dreams the Great Serpent holding its own tail in 
its mouth, the dreaming Serpent which surrounds the World. 
But the meanness, the cynicism with which this dream is 
to be used. The Serpent that announces, “The World is a 
closed thing, cyclical, resonant, eternally-returning,” is to 
be delivered into a system whose only aim is to violate — 
the Cycle. Taking and not giving back, demanding that 
“productivity” and “earnings” keep on increasing with 
time, the System removing from the rest of the World 
these vast quantities of energy to keep its own tiny desper- 
ate fraction showing a profit: and not only most of human- 
ity—most of the World, animal, vegetable and mineral, is 
laid waste in the process, The System may or may not ~ 
_ understand that it’s only buying time. And that time is an i 


\ 
Li 
U 


| 
| 
| 
| 


I 


In the Zone 481 


artificial resource to begin with, of no value to. anyone or 
anything but the System, which sooner or later must crash 
to its death, when its addiction to energy has become-more 
than the rest of the World can supply, dragging with it 
innocent souls all along the chain of life. Living inside the 
System is like riding across the country in a bus driven by 
a maniac bent on suicide... though he’s amiable enough, 
keeps cracking jokes back through the loudspeaker, “Good 
morning folks, this is Heidelberg. here were coming into 
now, you know the old refrain, ‘I lost my heart in Heidel- 


/ berg,’ well I have a friend who lost both his ears herel 


Don’t get me wrong, it’s really a nice town, the people 
are warm and wonderful—when they're not dueling. 
Seriously though, they treat you just fine, they don’t just 
give you the key to the city, they give you the bung- 
starter!” u.s.w. On you roll, across a countryside whose 
light is forever changing—castles, heaps of rock, moons of 
different shapes and colors come and go. There are stops 
at odd hours of the mornings, for reasons that are not an- 
nounced: you. get out to stretch in lime-lit courtyards 
where the old men sit around the table under enormous 
eucalyptus trees you Gan smell in the night, shuffling the 
ancient decks oily and worn, throwing down swords and 
cups and trumps major in the tremor of light while be- 
hind them the bus is idling, waiting—passengers will now 
reclaim their seats and much as you'd like to stay, right 
here, learn the game, find your old age around this quiet 


_table, it’s no use: he is waiting beside the door of the bus 


in his pressed uniform, Lord of the Night he is checking 


| your tickets, your ID and travel papers, and it’s the wands 


of enterprise that dominate tonight ...as he nods you by, 
you catch a glimpse of his face, his insane, committed 


‘eyes, and you remember then, for a terrible few heart- 


beats, that of course it will end for you all in blood, in 
shock, without dignity—but there is meanwhile this trip 
to be on... over your own seat, where there ought to be 
an advertising plaque, is instead a quote from Rilke: 
“Once, only once...” One of Their favorite slogans. No 
return, no salvation, no Cycle—that’s not what They, nor 
Their brilliant employee Kekulé, have taken the: Serpent 


_to mean. No: what the Serpent means is—how’s this— 


that the six carbon atoms of benzene are in fact curled 


482 . Graviry’s Ramnsow 


around into a closed ring, just like that snake with its tail 
in its mouth, -GET IT? “The aromatic Ring we know to- — 
day,” Pékler’s old prof, Laszlo Jamf, at this point in the 
spiel removing from his fob a gold hexagon with the Ger- 
man formée cross in the center, a. medal of honor from 
IG Farben, joking, in his lovable-old-fart manner, that he 
likes to think of the cross not as German so much as stand- 
ing for the tetravalency of carbon—“but who,” lifting his 
open hands on each beat, like a bandleader, “who, sent, 
the Dream?” It is never clear how rhetorical any of Jamf. s 
questions are. “Who sent this new serpent to our ruinous 
garden, already too fouled, too crowded to qualify as any 
locus of innocence—unless innocence be our age’s neutral, 
our silent passing into the machineries of indifference— 
something that Kekulé’s Serpent had come to—not to 
destroy, but to define to us the loss of... we had been 
given certain molecules, certain combinations and not 
others... we used what we found in Nature, unquestion- 
ing, shamefully perhaps—but the Serpent whispered, ~ 
‘They can be changed, and new molecules assembled from — 
the debris of the given. ...’ Can anyone tell me what else — 
he whispered to us? Come—who knows? You. Tell < 
Poékler—” 

His name fell on him like a thunderclap, aad of coUnse 
it wasn’t Prof.-Dr. Jamf after all, but a colleague from 
down the hall who had pulled reveille duty that morning. 
Ilse was brushing her hair, and smiling at him. 

His daytime work had started to go better. Others were 
not so distant, and more apt to look in his eyes. They'd 
met Ilse, and been charmed. If he saw anything else in 
their faces, he ignored it. 

Then one evening he returned from the Oie, a little : 
drunk, a little anxious-elated over a firing the next day, — 
and found his cubicle empty. Ilse, her flowered bag, the ~ 
clothing she usually left strewn on the cot, had: all van- — 
ished. Nothing left but a wretched sheet of log paper — 
(which Pékler found so useful for taming the terror of — 
_ exponential curves into the linear, the safe), the same kind 
she’d drawn pictures of her Moonhouse - 0 . “Papi, they — 
want me back. Maybe they'll let me see yo again, I hope 
so. I love you. Ilse.” ’ 

Kurt Mondaugen found Pékler lying on her cot breath- — 


In the Zone 483 


ing what he imagined were colors of her hair on the pil- 
low. For a while then he went. a little insane,: talked of 
killing Weissmann, sabotaging the rocket program, and 
quitting his job and seeking asylum in England. ... Mond- 
augen sat, and listened to all of it, touched Pokler once or 
twice, smoked his pipe, till at last, at two or three in the 
morning, Pékler had talked through a number of unreal 
options, cried, cursed, punched a hole into his neighbor’s 
cubicle, through which he heard the man snoring on ob- 
livious. Cooled by then toa vexed engineer-elitism—“They 
are fools, they don’t even know what sine and cosine are 
and they’re trying to tell me”—he agreed that yes, he must 
wait, and let them do what they would do.... 

“If I set up a meeting with Weissmann,” Mondaugen did 
suggest, “could’you be graceful? calm?” 

“No. Not with him. ... Not yet.” 
“When you think you are ready, let me know. When 
you're ready, youll know how to handle it.” Had he 
allowed himself a tone of command? He must have seen 
how much Pékler needed to be at someone’s command. 
Leni had learned to subdue her husband with her face, 
knew what cruel lines he expected of her mouth, what 
tones of voice he needed ... when she left him she left an 
unemployed servant who'd go with the first master that 
called, just a 
| 


VICTIM IN A Vacuum! 


Nur... ein... Op-ferl 

Sehr ins Vakuum, 
(“Won't somebody take advantage of me?”) 

Wird niemand ausnut-zen mich, auch?. 
(“Just a slave with nobody to slave for,”’) 

Nur ein Sklave, ohne Her-rin, (ya-ta ta-ta) 
(“A-and who th’ heck wants at be, free?” ) 

Wer zum Teufel die Freiheit, braucht? 


(All together now, all you masochists out there, spe- 
cially those of you don’t have a partner tonight, alone 
with those fantasies that don’t look like they'll ever 
come true—want you just to join in here with your 
brothers and sisters, let each other know you're alive 
and sincere, try to’ break: through the silences, try to 
reach through and connect, .. .) ; 


484 Gravity's RaInsow 


Aw, the sodium lights-aren’t, so bright in Berlin, 
I go to the bars dear, but nobody’s inl : 
Oh, I'd much rather bee a j 
In a Greek trage-dee, f 
Than be a VICTIM IN A. VACUUM to-nitel! 

p 

Days. passed, much like one another to Pékler. Identical 
morning plunges into a routine dreary as winter now. He 
learned to keep an outward calm, at least. Learned to feel 
the gathering, the moving toward war that is unique to 
weapons programs, At first it simulates depression or non- 
specific anxiety. There may be esophagal spasms and un- 
recoverable dreams. You find you are writing notes to 
yourself, first thing in the morning: calm, reasoned assur=| 
ances to the screaming mental. case inside—1. It is a com= 
bination, 1.1 It is a scalar quantity. 1.2. Its negative as- 
pects are distributed isotropically, 2. It.is not a conspiracy, 
2.1 It is not a vector. 2.11 It is not aimed at anybody. 
2.12 It is not aimed at me... u.s.w. The coffee begins to 
taste more and more metallic. Each deadline is now a 
crisis, each is more intense than the last. Behind this job- 
like-any-other-job seems to lie something void, something 
terminal, something growing closer, each day, to mani- 
festation. . (“The new planet Plato, ” she had whispered 
long ago, lying in the smelly dark, her long Asta Nielsen” 
upper lip gibbous that night as the moon that ruled her, 

“Pluto is in my sign now, held tight in its claws. It moves 
slowly, so slowly and so far away... but it will burst “—_ 
It is the grim phoenix which creates its own holocaust . 
deliberate resurrection. Staged. Under control. No grabell 
no interventions by God. Some are calling it the planet of 
National Socialism, Brunhiibner and that crowd, all trying” 
to suck up to Hitler now. They don’t know they are telling” 
the literal truth. ... Are you awake? Franz. ...”) 

As war drew closer: the game of priorities ind politicke 
ing grew more eamest, Army vs. Luftwaffe, the. Weapons 
Department vs. the Ministry of Munitions, the SS, given 
their aspirations, vs. everybody else, and even a simmering 
discontent that was to grow over the next few years into 
a palace revolt against von Braun, because of his youth 
and a number of test failures—though heaven knew, there 
were soho enough of those, they were the raw material 


rks % 


i d x 
| __ In the Zone 485 


| 
bf all testing-station politics.... In general, though, the 
test results grew more and more > hopeful. It was impossible 
| pet to think of the Rocket without thinking of Shicksal, of 
growing toward a shape predestined and perhaps a little 
rian The crews launched an uncontrolled series of 
Ass bringing some of them down by parachute, reaching 
height of five miles and nearly to the speed of sound. 
ie the guidance people had still a long way to go, 
ey had by this point switched over to vanes made of 
graphite, brought the yaw oscillations down to five degrees 
or so, and grown measurably happier about the Rocket's 
stability. 
At some. point during the winter, Pékler came ‘to feel 
that he could handle a meeting with Weissmann. He 
found the SS man on guard behind eyeglasses like Wag- 
nerian shields, ready for unacceptable maxima—anger, 
accusation, a moment of office-violence. It was like meeting 
a stranger. They had not spoken since the days at Kum- 
mersdorf, at the old Raketenflugplatz. In this quarter- 
sag at Peenemiinde, Pokler smiled more than he had in 
year previous; spoke. of his admiration for Poehl- 
ann’s work in devising a cooling system for the att 
sion. 
| “What about the hot spots?” Weissmann asked. It was a 
reasonable question, but also an intimacy. 
_ It came to Poékler that the man didn’t give a damn about 
heating problems. This was a game, as Mondaugen had 
warned—ritualized as jiu-jitsu. “We've got heat-flow densi- 
ties,” Pokler feeling as he usually did when he sang, “on 
the order of three million kcal/m*h°C. Regenerative cool- 
fe is the best interim solution right now, but Poehlmann 
as a new approach”—showing him with chalk and slate, 
trying for the professional manner—‘“he feels that if we 
use a film of alcohol on the inside of the chamber, we can 
educe the heat transfer by a considerable amount.” 
_ “You'll be injecting it.” 
“Correct.” 
_ “How much fuel is that going to reroute? How’s it going 
. affect the engine efficiency 
_Pékler had the figures. “Right now injection is a plumb- 
rs. nightmare, but with the delivery schedules as they 


486 Gravity’s RAInBow 


“What about the two-stage combustion process?” 

“Gives us more volume, better turbulence, but there’s 
also a non-isotropic pressure drop, which cuts into our 
efficiency. ... We're trying any number of approaches. If 
we could depend on better funding—” 

“Ah. Not my department. We could do with a more 
generous budget ourselves.” They both laughed then, 
gentleman scientists under a stingy bureaucracy, suffering 
together. 

Pékler understood that he had been negotiating for his 
child and for Leni: that the questions and answers were 
not exactly code for something else, but in the way of an 
evaluation of Pékler personally. He was expected to be- 
have a certain way—not just to play a role, but to live it. 
Any deviations into jealousy, metaphysics, vagueness 
would be picked up immediately: he would either be cor- 
rected back on course, or allowed to fall. Through winter 
and spring the sessions with Weissmann became routine. 
Pokler grew into his new disguise—Prematurely Aged 
Adolescent Whiz—often fiinding that it could indeed take 
him over, keeping him longer at reference books and firing 
data, speaking lines for him he could never have planned in 
advance: gentle, scholarly, rocket-obsessed language that 
surprised him. . 

In late August he had his second visit, It should have 
been “Ilse returned,” but Pékler wasn’t sure. As before, 
she showed up alone, unannounced—ran to him, kissed 
him, called him Papi. But... 

But her hair, for one thing, was definitely dark brown, 
and cut differently. Her eyes were’ longer, set differently, 
her complexion less fair. It seemed she’d grown a foot 
taller, But at that age, they shoot up overnight, don’t they? 
If it was “that age. ...” Even as Pokler embraced her, the 
perverse whispering began. Is it the same one? Have they 
sent you a different child? Why didn’t you look closer last 
time, Pékler? 

This time he asked how long they were going to let her 
stay.’ ; ha Til 

“They'll tell me. And Ill try to let you know.” And 
would there be time for him to recalibrate! from his little 
squirrel who dreamed of living on the Moon to this dark, 
long-legged, Southern creature, whose awkwardness and 


ark 


In the Zone. 487 


need of a father were so touching, so clear even to Pékler, 

at this their second (or was it first, or third?) meeting? 
Hardly any news of Leni. They had been separated, Ilse 

said, during the winter. She'd heard..a rumor that her 


_ mother had been moved to a different camp. So,,so. Pres- 


ST a ey 


a 


Sa 


ae 


ent.a-pawn, withdraw the queen: Weissmann, waiting to 
see how Pékler would react. This time he had gone too 
far; Pékler laced up his shoes and calmly enough went out 
looking for the SS man, comered him in his office, de- 
nounced him before a panel of kindly, dim governmental 
figures, the speech eloquéntly climaxing.as he threw chess- 
board. and pieces all into Weissmann’s arrogantly blinking 
face... Pékler’s impetuous, yes, a rebel—but General- 
direktor it’s his kind of fire and honestly we need— 

The child had suddenly come into his arms, to kiss him 
again. For free, Pokler forgot his troubles and held her to 
his heart for a long time, without speaking. . 

But that night in the cubicle, only byoathibetaib moon- 
wishes this year—from her cot, he was awake wondering, 
one daughter one impostor? same daughter twice? two im- 
postors? Beginning to work out the combinations for a third: 
visit, a.fourth.... Weissmann, those behind ‘him, had 
thousands of these children available. As the years passed, 
as they grew more nubile, would Pékler.even come to fall 
in love with one—would she reach the king’s row that way 
and become a queen-substitute for lost, for forgotten Leni? 
The Opponent knew that Pokler’s suspicion would always 
be stronger than any fears about real incest.. . They 
could make up new, rules, to complicate the game in- 
definitely. How could any man as empty as Pékler felt 
that night be flexible enough for that? 

Kot—it was ridiculous—hadn’t he seen her go by from 
every angle in their old city rooms? Carried, asleep, crying, 
crawling, laughing, hungry. Often he had come home too 
tired to make it to the bed, and had lain on the floor with 
his head under the one wood table, curled, beaten, wonder- 
ing if he could even sleep. The first time Ilse noticed, she 
crawled over and sat staring at him for a long time. She 


had never seen him still, horizontal, with his eyes shut. . 


He drifted toward sleep. Ilse leaned over and bit him 4 in 
the leg, as she bit crusts of bread, cigarettes, shoes, any- 


thing that might be food. —I’m your father. —You're 


488 Graviry’s RaAInBow 


inert and edible. Pékler screamed and rolled out of the 
way. Ilse began to cry. He was too tired to want to think 
about discipline. It was Leni finally who calmed her down. 

He knew all Ilse’s cryings, her first attempts at words, 
the colors of her shit, the sounds and shapes that brought 
her tranquillity. He ought to know if this child was his 
own or not. But he didn’t. Too much had happened be- 
tween. Too much history and dream. ... 

Next morning his group leader handed Pékler a furlough 
chit, and a paycheck with a vacation bonus. No travel 
restrictions, but a time limit of two weeks. Translation: 
Will you come back? He packed some things, and they got 
on the train for Stettin. The sheds and assembly buildings, 
the concrete monoliths and steel gantries that were the 
map of his life flared backward, shadowing into great 
purplish chunks, isolated across the marshland one from 
another, in parallax away. Would he dare not to come 
back? Could he think so far ahead? 

He'd left their destination up to Ilse. She chose Zwélf- 
kinder. It was the end of summer, nearly the end of peace- 
time. The children knew what was coming. Playing refu- 
gee, they crowded the railway carriages, quieter, more 
solemn than Pékler had expected. He had to keep fighting 
an urge to start babbling each time Ilse’s eyes turned from 
the window toward his own. He saw the same thing in all 
their eyes: he was strange to them, to her, and growing 
stranger, and he knew of no way to reverse it... . 

In a corporate State, a place must be made for in- 
nocence, and its many uses. In developing an official ver- 
sion of innocence, the culture of childhood has proven in- 
valuable. Games, fairy-tales, legends from history, all the 
paraphernalia of make-believe can be adapted and even 
embodied in a physical place, such as at Zwolfkinder, 
Over the years it had become a children’s resort, almost a 
spa. If you were an adult, you couldn’t get inside the city 
limits without a child escort. There was a child mayor, a 


child city council of twelve. Children picked up the papers, — 


fruit peelings and bottles you left in the street, children 
gave you guided tours through the Tierpark, the Hoard 


of the Nibelungen, cautioning you to silence during the 


impressive re-enactment of Bismark’s elevation, at the 
spring equinox of 1871, to prince and imperial chancellor 


'» In the Zone » 489 


.. child police reprimanded you if you were caught alone, 


without your child accompanying. Whoever carried on the 


real business of the town—it could not have been. chil- 
dren—they were well hidden. 

A late summer, a late, retrospective blooming. ... Birds 
flew everywhere, the sea warmed, the sun shone on into 
the evenings. Random children took your shirt cuff by 
mistake, and trudged along for minutes before discovering 
you were not their adult, and then wandered off. with 
backward smiles. The Glass Mountain twinkled’ rose and 
white in the hot sun, the elf king and his queen made a 
royal progress every noon with a splendid retinue of 
dwarves and sprites, handing out cakes, ices and candies. 
At each intersection or square, bands played—marches, 
folk-dances, hot jazz, Hugo Wolf. Children went streaming 
like confetti. At the drinking fountains, where soda water 
sparkled deep inside the fanged mouths of dragons, of wild 
lions and tigers, the queues of children waited, each for 
his moment of danger, leaning halfway into the shadow, 
into the smell of wet cement and old water, into the 
mouth of the beast, to drink. In the sky, the tall ferris 
wheel spun. From Peenemiinde they had come 280 kilom- 
eters, which was to be, coincidentally, the operational 
range of the Ay. 

Among all there was to choose from, Wheel, myths, 
jungle animals, clowns, Ilse found her way to the Antarctic 
Panorama. Two or three boys hardly older than she wan- 
dered through the imitation wilderness, bundled up in 
sealskins, constructing cairns and planting flags in the 
August humidity. Watching them made Pékler sweat. A 
few “sled dogs” lay suffering in the shade of the dirty 
papier-maché sastrugi, on plaster snow that had begun to 
crack, A hidden projector threw images of the aurora on 
a white scrim. Half a dozen stuffed penguins also dotted 


_ the landscape. 


“So—you want to live at the South Pole. Have you 
given up so easily on”—Kot—idiot, that was a slip—“on 
the Moon?” He’d been good up till then about cross- 


examining. He couldn’t afford to know who she was. In 


i 
2 


the false Antarctic, in ignorance of what had attracted her 


_ there, uneasy and dripping sweat, he waited for her 


ue 


5 
\ 
i 
\ 


answer, 


490 Gravity's Rainsow 


She, or They, let him off. “Oh,” with a shrug, “who 
wants to live on the Moon?” They never brought it up 
again. 

Back at their hotel, they were handed the key by an 
eight-year-old desk clerk, rose inva whining elevator run 
by a uniformed child, to-a room still warm from the day’s 
heat. She closed the door, took off her hat and scaled it 
over to her bed. Pékler collapsed on his own bed. She 
came over to take off his shoes. 

“Papi,” gravely unlacing, “may I sleep next to you to- 
night?” One of her hands had come lightly to rest on the 
beginning of his bare calf. Their eyes met for half a 
second. A number of uncertainties shifted then for Pékler 
and locked into sense. To his shame, his first feeling was 
pride. He hadn’t known he was so vital to the program. 
Even in this initial moment, he was seeing it from Their 
side—every quirk goes in the dossier, gambler, foot-fetish- 
ist or soccer fan, it’s all important, it can all be used. Right 
now we have to keep them happy, or at least neutralize 
the foci of their unhappiness. You may not understand 
what their work really is, not at the level of the data, but 
you're an administrator after all, a leader, your job is to get 
results ... Pékler, now, has mentioned a “daughter.” Yes, 
yes we know it’s disgusting, one never can tell what they 
have locked up in there with those equations, but we must 
all put off our judgments for now, there'll be time after the 
war to get back to the Péklers and their dirty little se- 
crets.... . ; 

He hit her upside the head with his open hand, a loud 
and terrible blow. That took care of his anger. Then; be- 
fore she could cry or speak, he had dragged her up on the 
bed next to him, her dazed little hands already at the 
buttons of his trousers, her white frock already pulled 
above her waist. She had been wearing nothing at all 
undermeath, nothing all day... how I’ve wanted you, she 
whispered as paternal plow found its way into filial fur- 
row...and after hours of amazing incest; they dressed in 
silence, and crept out into the leading edge of faintest 
flesh dawn, everything they would ever need packed in- 
side her flowered bag, past sleeping children doomed to | 
the end of summer, past monitors and railway guards, — 
down at last to the water and the fishing boats, to a 


_In the Zone 491 


fatherly old sea-dog in a braided captain’s hat, who wel- 
comed them aboard and stashed them below decks, where 
she snuggled down in the bunk as they got under way 
and sucked him for hours while the engine pounded, till 
the Captain called, “Come on up, and take a look at your 
new home!” Gray and green, through the mist, it’ was 
Denmark. “Yes, they’re a free people here. Good luck to 
both of youl” The three of them, there on deck, stood 
hugging.... 

No. What Pokler did was choose to believe she wanted 
comfort that night, wanted not to be alone. Despite Their 
game, Their palpable evil, though he had no more reason 
to trust “Ilse” than he trusted Them, by an act not of faith, 
not of courage but of conservation, he chose to believe 

- that. Even in peacetime, with unlimited resources, he 
couldn’t have proven her identity, not beyond the knife- — 
edge of zero tolerance his precision eye needed. The years 
Ilse would have spent between Berlin and Peenemiinde 
were so hopelessly. tangled, for all of Germany, that no 
real chain of events could have been established for sure, 
not even Pékler’s hunch that somewhere in the State’s over- 
size paper brain a specific perversity had been assigned 
him and dutifully stored. For every government agency, 
the Nazi Party set up a duplicate. Committees fissioned, 
merged, generated spontaneously, disappeared. No one 
would show a man his dossier— 

It was not, in fact, even clear to him that he had made 

a choice. But it was in those humming moments in the 
room smelling of a.summer day, whose light no one had lit 
yet, with her round straw hat a frail moon on the bed- 
spread, lights of the Wheel slowly pouring red and green 
over and over outside in the dark, and a group of school- 
boys singing in the street a refrain from before their time, 
their sold-out and cruelly handled time—Juch-heierasas-sal 
o tempo-tempo-ral—that board and pieces and patterns at 
least all did come clear for him, and Poékler knew that 
while he played, this would have to be Ilse—truly his 
child, truly as he could make her. It was the real moment 
of conception, in which, years too late, he became her 

_ father. 

_ Through the rest of the furlough, they strolled about 
Zwolfkinder, always hand in hand. Lanterns swaying from 


492 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


the trunks of elephants’ heads on top of tall pillars lit their 
way... over spidery bridges looking down. at snow-leop- 
ards, apes, hyenas .. . along the miniature railway, between 
the corrugated pipe legs of steel-mesh dinosaurs, down to 
the patch of African desert where every two hours exactly 
the treacherous natives attacked an encampment of Gen- 
eral von Trotha’s brave men in blue, all the parts played 
by exuberant boys, and a great patriotic favorite with 
children of all ages... up on the giant Wheel so naked; so 
void of grace, there for only the clear mission: to lift and 
to frighten... . : 

On their last night—though he didn’t know it, for they 
would take her as abruptly and invisibly as before—they 


stood looking in again at stuffed penguins and false snow, 


and around them the artificial aurora flickered. 

“Next year,” squeezing her hand, “we'll come back 
here, if you like.” 

“Oh yes. Every year, Papi.” 

Next day she was gone, taken back into the coming war, 
leaving Pokler alone in a country of children, to go back 
to Peenemiinde after all, alone. ... 

So it has gone for the six years since. A daughter a year, 
each one about a year older, each time taking up nearly 
from scratch. The only continuity has been her name, and 
Zwolfkinder, and Pékler’s love—love something like the 
persistence of vision, for They have used it to create for 
him the moving image of a daughter, flashing him only 
these summertime frames of her, leaving it to him to build 
the illusion of a single child... what would the time scale 
matter, a 24th of a second ’or a year (no more, the engi- 
neer thought, than in a wind-tunnel, or an oscillograph 
whose turning drum you could speed or slow at will. . 2yP 

Outside the Peenemiinde wind-tunnel, Pékler has come 
to stand at night, next to the the great sphere, 40 feet high, 
listening to the laboring pumps as they evacuate the air 
from the white sphere, five minutes of growing void— 
then one terrific gasp: 20 seconds of supersonic flow... 
then’ the fall of the shutter, and the pumps starting up 
again... he has listened, and taken it to imply his own 
cycle of shuttered love, growing empty over the year for 
two weeks in August, engineered with the same care. He 
has smiled, and drunk toasts, and traded barracks humor 


“~~ See 
aia: 


In the Zone: 493 


. with Major Weissmann, while all the time, behind the 


music and the giggling, he could hear the flesh of pieces 
moved in darkness and winter across the marshes and 
mountain chains of the board...watched run after run 
the Halbmodelle results out of the wind tunnel, showing 
how the net normal force would be distributed over the 
Rocket’s length, for hundreds of different Mach numbers— 
seen the true profile of the Rocket warped and travestied, 
a rocket of wax, humped like a dolphin at around caliber 
2, necking down toward the tail which was then stretched 


' up, impossibly, in a high point with a lower shoulder aft 


-of it—and seen how his own face might be plotted, not in 


light but in net forces acting upon it from the flow of 
Reich and coercion and love it moved through... and 
known that it must suffer the same degradation, as death 
will warp face to skull.... 

In 43, because he was away at Zwolfkinder, Pékler 
missed the British air raid on Peenemiinde. Returning to 
the station,:as soon as he came in sight of the “foreign - 
workers’ ” quarters at Trassenheide razed and smashed, 
bodies still beirig dug from the wreckage, a terrible sus- 
picion began, and: would not be put down. Weissmann 
was saving him for something: some unique destiny. Some- 
how the man had known the British would bomb that 
night, known even in ’39, and so arranged the tradition of 


_ an August furlough, year after year but all toward protect- 


ing Pékler from the one bad night. Not quite balanced... 
a bit paranoid, yes, yes... but the thought purred: on in 
his brain, and he felt himself turning to stone. ~ 

Smoke seeped from the earth, charred trees fell, as he 
watched, at no more than a breath from the direction of 
the sea. Powdered. dust rose up’ at every footfall, turning 
clothes white, faces to masks of dust. The farther up the 
peninsula, the less damage. A strange gradient of death 
and wreckage, south to north, in which the poorest and 
most helpless got it worst—as, indeed, the gradient was to 
run east to west, in London a year later when the rockets 
began to. fall. Most of the casualties had been among 
“foreign workers,” a euphemism for civilian prisoners 


. brought in from countries under German occupation. The 


wind tunnel and the measuring house were untouched, the 


_ pre-production works only slightly damaged. Pékler’s col- 


494 Gravity’s RaInsow ‘ 
leagues were outside Scientist Housing, which had been 
hit—phantoms moving in morning fog still not bumed 
off, washing up in buckets of beer because the water was 
still out. They stared at Pokler, failing, enough of them, to 
keep accusation out of their faces.» 

“I wish I could have missed this,” 

“Dr. Thiel is dead.” 

“How was fairyland, Pékler?” 

“Tm sorry,” he said. It wasn’t his fault. The others were 
‘silent; some watching, some still in shock from the night. 

Mondaugen showed up then. “We're exhausted. Could 
you come with me to Pre-production? A lot has to be 
sorted out, we need a hand.” They shuffled along, each in 
his own dust-cloud. “It was terrible,” Mondaugen said. “All 
of us have been under some strain.” 

“They sounded like I’'d done it.” ¥ cs 

“You feeling guilty because you weren’t here?” 

“I'm wondering why I wasn’t here. That’s all.” 

“Because you were in Zwélfkinder,” replied the en- 
lightened one. “Don’t invent. complications.” 

He tried not to. That was Weissmann’s job, wasn’t ‘it, 
Weissmann was the sadist, he had: responsibility for com- 
ing up with new game-variations, building toward a maxi- 
mum cruelty in which Pékler would be unlaid to nerves 
vessels and tendons, every last convolution of brain flat- 
tened out in the radiance of the black candles, nowhere 
to shelter, entirely his master’s possession . ..; the moment 
in which he is defined to himself at last. . ... This is what 
Pokler could feel waiting now, a room he’d never séen, a 
ceremony he couldn’t memorize in advance. ... 

There were false alarms. Pékler was almost sure once 
during the winter, during the test series at Blima. They 
had moved east into Poland, to fire over land. The shots 
from Peenemiinde were all out to sea, and there'd been no 
way to observe the re-entry of the A4. Blizna was almost 
exclusively an SS project: part of Maj.-Gen. Kammler’s 
empire-building. The Rocket at that point was plagued by 
an airburst problem in its terminal phase—the vehicle blew 
apart before reaching the target. Everyone had an idea. 
It might be an overpressure in the liquid-oxygen tank. 
Perhaps, because the Rocket coming down was lighter by 
10 tons of fuel and oxidizer, the shift in the center of 


ost ee 


a 


In the Zone - 495 


gravity was making it unstable. Or perhaps the insulation 
on the alcohol tank was at fault, somehow allowing resid- 
ual fuel to be burned on re-entry. This was Pokler’s 
reason for being there. By then he was no longer in the 
propulsion group, or even working as a designer—he was 
in the Materials office, expediting the procurement of 
various plastics for insulation, shock absorption, gasketry— 
exciting stuff. The orders to Blizna were strange enough to 
be Weissmann’s work: the day Pékler went out to sit in 
the Polish meadows at the exact spot where the Rocket 
was supposed to come down, he was certain. 

Green rye and low hills for miles: all around, Pékler was 
by a small trench, in the Sarnaki target area, pointing his 
binoculars south toward Blizna like everybody else: wait- 
ing. Erwartung in the crosshairs, with the just-sprung rye 
blowing, its gentler nap being brushed up by the wind . 
look down at this countryside, down through Rockét-miles 
of moming space: the many shades of forest green, Polish 
farmhouses white and brown, dark eels of rivers catching 
the sun at their curves...and at the very center down 
there, in the holy X, Pokler, crucified, invisible at first look, 
but in a moment... now beginning to resolve as the fall 
gathers momentum— - 

But how can ‘he believe in its reality up there? Insects 
whine, the sun is almost warm, he can gaze off at the red 
earth and millions of blowing stalks, and fall nearly into a 
light trance: in shirtsleeves, with his bony knees pointing 
up, the gray suit jacket wrinkled years beyond last pressing 
bundled under his ass to soak up the dew. The others 
he came out with are dotted here about Ground Zero, 
blithe Nazi buttercups—binoculars sway from slate-colored 
horsehide straps around their necks, the Askania crew 
fuss with their equipment, and one of the SS liaison men 
(Weissmann isn’t here) keeps looking at his watch, then 
at the sky, then the watch, the crystal becoming, in brief 
flashes on/off, a nacreous circle binding together the hour 
and the fleecy sky. 

Pokler scratches at a graying 48-hour beard, bites at lips 
very chapped, as if he has spent most of the late winter 
outside: he has a winter look. Around his eyes, over the 
years, has grown a ruinous system of burst capillaries, 
shadows, folds, crowsfeet, a ground that by now has 


496 Gravirty’s Rainsow 


gathered in the simple, direct eyes of his younger and 
poorer days...no. Something was in them, even then, 
something others saw and knew they could use, and 
found how to. Something Pékler missed. He’s spent enough 
of his life looking into mirrors. He really ought to remem- 
ber..... 

The airburst, if it happens, will be in visual range. 
Abstractions, math, models are fine, but when you’re down 
to it and everybody’s hollering for a fix, this is what you 
do: you go and sit exactly on the target with indifferent 
shallow trenches for shelter, and you watch it in the silent 
firebloom of its last few seconds, and see what you will 
see. Chances are astronomically against a perfect hit, of 
course, that is why one is safest at the center of the 
target area. Rockets are supposed to be like artillery shells, 
they disperse about the aiming point in a giant ellipse— 
the Ellipse of Uncertainty. But Pékler, though trusting as 
much as any scientist in uncertainty, is not feeling too secure 
here. It is after all his own personal ass whose quivering 
sphincter is centered right on Ground Zero, And there is 
more to this than ballistics. There is Weissmann, Any num- 
ber of chemists and materials people know as much about 
insulation as Pokler... why should he have been picked, 
unless... somewhere... in his brain now two foci sweep to- 
gether and become one . .. zero ellipse. ..asingle point... 
a live warhead, secretly loaded, special bunkers for every- 
one else ... yes that’s what he wants .:. . all tolerances in the 
guidance cooperating toward a perfect shot, right on top 
of Pékler... ah, Weissmann, your end game lacks finesse— 
but there were never spectators and judges not in all this 
time, and who ever said the end could not be this brutal? 
Paranoia has rushed Pékler, drowned him to the temples 
and scalp. He may have shit, he can’t tell. His pulse thuds 
in his neck. His hands and feet ache. The black-suited 
blond enforcers look on. Their metal insignia twinkle. Low 
hillsides lie under early sun. All the field glasses stare 
south, The Aggregat is on route, nothing can be changed. 
No one else here cares for the penetralia of the moment, 
or last mysteries: there have been too sera rational 
years. The paper has piled too thick and far. Pékler cannot 
reconcile, not really, his dream of the perfectly victimized 
with the need bred into him to take care of business—nor 


a 


In the Zone 497 


see how these may be one and the same. The A4 must, 
after all, go out in the field very soon, this failure rate 
must be brought down, and so those who’ve come are here, 
and if there is a massive failure of vision this morning in 
the Polish meadow, if no one, not even the most paranoid, 
can see anything at all beyond the stated Requirements, cer- 
tainly it’s not unique to this time, this place, where the 
eyes cupped against the black binoculars are looking only 
for the day’s “reluctant virgin”’—as the witty rocketeers 
have dubbed their problem rockets—to announce herself 
... to note where, forward to aft, the trouble may be, the 
shape of a vapor trail, the sound of the burst, anything 
that might help. ... 

At Sarnaki, as the records tell it, the rocket came down 
that day with:the usual double-blast, a streak of white 
condensation in the blue sky: another premature airburst. 
Steel fragments fell, a hundred feet away from the Zero 
point, slashing into the rye like hail. Pékler saw the explo- 
sion, no more than anyone else. He was never sent out 
again. The SS people watched him get to his feet, and 
stretch, and slowly move off with the others. Weissmann 
would get his report. New varieties of torture would be 
coming. 

But inside Pékler’s life, on no record but his soul, his 
poor harassed German soul, the time base has lengthened, 
and slowed: the Perfect Rocket is still up there, still de- 
scending. He still waits—even now, alone at Zwélfkinder 
waiting for “Ilse,”-for this summer’s return, and with it an 
explosion that will take him by surprise. ... - 

In the spring, when the winds at Peenemiinde had 
shifted around to the southwest, and the first birds were 
back, Pékler was transferred to the underground factory 
at Nordhausen, in the Harz. Work at Peenemiinde, after 
the British raid, had begun to fall off. The plan—again 
Kammler’s—was now to disperse testing and production 
around Germany, to prevent another and possibly fatal 
Allied attack. Pékler’s duties at the Mittelwerke were rou- 
tine: materials, procurement. He slept in a bunk next to a 
wall of dynamited stone painted white, with a bulb over 


» his head burning all night long. He dreamed that the bulb 


was a representative of ‘Weissmann, a creature whose 


bright filament was its soul. They held long dream-dia- 


498 Gravity's Rainsow 


logues whose substance Pékler could never remember. The 
bulb was explaining the plot to him in detail—it was 
more grand and sweeping than Pékler could ever have 
imagined, it seemed many nights to be purely music, his 
consciousness moving through the soundscape at bay, ob- 
serving, compliant, still precariously safe, but not for long. 

At the time there were rumors of an estrangement grow- 
ing between Weissmann and his “monster,” Enzian. The 
Schwarzkommando by then had grown away from the SS 
structure, much as the SS itself had from the German 
Army. Their power now lay not in absolute weaponry but 
in information and expertise. Pékler was happy to hear 
that Weissmann was having his troubles, but at a loss how 
to use it to any advantage. When his orders to Nordhausen 
had come through, he’d had a flash of despair. Was the 
game adjourned then? He might never see Ilse again. But 
a memo had come, telling him to report to Weissmann in 
his office. 

The hair at Weissmann’s temples was graying and dis- 
arranged. Pékler saw that one earpiece of his glasses was 
held on with a paper clip. His desk was a litter of docu- 
ments, reports, reference books. It was a surprise to see 
him looking less diabolical than harassed as any civil 
servant under pressure. His eyes were aimed in Pokler’s 
direction, but the lenses distorted them: 

“You understand that this transfer to Nordhausen is 
voluntary.” 

Poékler understood, with relief and two seconds of actual 
love for his protector, that the game was still on. “It will 
be something new.” 

“Yes?” Partly a challenge, but party interested too. 

“Production. We’ve been so involved here with the re- 
search-and-development end. It’s not a*weapon for us so 
much as a ‘flying laboratory,’ as Dr. Thiel said once—” 

“Do you miss Dr. Thiel?” _ 

“Yes. He wasn’t in my section. I didn’t know him well.” 

“A.shame he got caught in the raid. We i move in an 
Ellipse of Uncertainty, don’t we?” 

Pékler allowed himself a look at si cluttered desk, 
quick enough to be taken either for nervousness or as a 
comeback—Weissmann, looks like you have your own 
Ellipse all right—“Oh, I don’t have the time usually to 
worry. At least the Mittelwerke is underground.” 


In the Zone 499 


“The tactical sites won't be.” 

“Do you think I might be sent—” 

Weissmann shrugged and favored Pékler with a big 
fake smile: “My dear Pékler, how can anyone predict 

where you'll go? We'll see how it all develops.” 
_- Later, in the Zone, with his guilt become a sensual 
thing, prickling at his eyes and membranes like an allergy, 
it would seem to Pékler that he could not, even by that day 
_in Weissmann’s office, have been ‘ignorant of the truth. 
That he had known the truth with his senses, but allowed 
all the evidence to be misfiled where it wouldn’t upset 
him. Known everything, but refrained from the only act 
that could have redeemed ‘him. He should have throttled 
Weissmann where he sat, corrugations of skinny throat and 
Adam/’s apple sliding under Pokler’s palms, thick eyeglasses 
_ sliding off as the weak little eyes go blearing helplessly 
after their final darkener. .. . 

Pékler helped: with his own blindness. He knew about 
Nordhausen, and the Dora camp: he could see—the 
starved bodies, the eyes of the foreign prisoners being 
marched to work at four in the morning in the freezing 
cold and darkness, the shuffling thousands in their striped 
uniforms. He had known too, all along, that Ilse was living 
in a re-education camp. But it wasn’t till August, when the - 
furlough arrived as usual in its blank kraft envelope, and 
Poékler rode northward through the gray kilometers of a 

_ Germany he no longer recognized, bombed and burned, 
_the wartime villages and rainy purple heath, and found 
_ her at last waiting in the hotel lobby at Zwolfkinder with 
the same darkness in her eyes (how had he missed it till 
now? such swimming orbits of pain) that he could finally 
put the two data together. For months, while her father 
across the wire or walls did his dutiful hackwork, she had 
been prisoner only a few meters away from him, beaten, 
perhaps violated. ... If he must curse Weissmann, then he 
must also curse himself. Weissmann’s cruelty was no less 
resourceful than Pékler’s own engineering skill, the gift of 
Daedalus that allowed him to put as much labyrinth as 
required between himself and the inconveniences of caring. 
They had sold him convenience, so much of it, all on 
credit, and now They were collecting. 
__ Trying, a bit late for it, to open himself to the pain he 
"should have been feeling, he questioned her now. Did she 


q 


dy 


- 


500 Gravity's Rainsow 


know the name of her camp? Yes, Ilse confirmed—or was 
told to answer—that it was Dora. The night before she 
left to come here she’d seen a hanging. Evening was the 
hour for the hangings. Did he want to hear about it? Did 
he want to hear about it.... 

She was very hungry. They spent the first few days eat- 
ing, whatever Zwolfkinder had to sell. There was less than 
the year before, and it was much more expensive. But the 
enclave of innocence still enjoyed a high priority, so there 
was something. 

Not so many children this year, though. The engineer 
and girl had the place practically to themselves. The Wheel 
and most of the other rides stood motionless. Petrol short- 
age, a child guard informed them. Luftwaffe flights roared 
overhead. Nearly every night the sirens cried out, and 
they watched the searchlights come on in Wismar and in 
Liibeck, and sometimes heard the bombs. What was Pékler 
doing in this dream world, this lie? His country waited to 
be crushed between invaders from east and west: back at 
Nordhausen the hysteria had risen to epic scale, as the 
first rockets were about to go out into the field, about to 
fulfill engineering prophecies old as peacetime. Why, at 
this critical moment, had they let Pékler off? Who élse 
these, days was getting furloughs? And what was “Ilse” 
doing here, wasn’t she supposed to be too old by now for 
fairy talesP her new breasts so visible now beneath her 
frock, her eyes so nearly empty drifting without real in- 
terest toward random boys destined for the Volkssturm, 
older boys, no more interested in her. They dreamed of 
their orders, of colossal explosions and death—if they even 
saw her it was sidewise, sly...her Father will tame her 
... her teeth will bite the pole ... someday I will have a 
herd of them for myself... but first I must find my Cap- 
tain... somewhere out in the. War... first they must de- 
liver me from this little place... . 

Who was that, going by just then—who was the slender 
boy who flickered across her path, so blond, so white he 
was nearly invisible in the hot haze that had come to 
settle over ZwolfkinderP Did she see him, and did she 
know him for her own second shadow? She was conceived 
because her father saw a movie called Alpdriicken one 
night and got a hardon. Pékler in his horny staring had 


i ._ In the Zone. 501 


missed the Director’s clever Gnostic symbolism in the 
lighting scheme of the two shadows, Cain’s and Abel’s. 

But Ilse, some Ilse, has persisted beyond her cinema 
' mother, beyond film’s end, and so have the shadows of 
_ shadows. In the Zone, all will be moving under the Old 
' Dispensation, inside the Cainists’ light and space: not out 
of any precious Gollerei, but because the Double Light was 
always there, outside all film, and that shucking and jiving 

moviemaker was the only one around at the time who 
| happened to notice it and use it, although in deep igno- 

rance, then and now, of what he was showing the nation of 

starers.... So that summer Ilse passed herself by, too 
_ fixed at some shadowless interior noon to mark the inter- 
| section, or to care.. 
She and Pokler hardly talked this time: it was their 
mutest holiday together. She walked broodful, her head 
'' down, her hair hooding her face, brown legs kicking at 
refuse the undermanned garbage detail hadn’t picked up. 
Was it her time of life, or did she resent being under 
_ orders to spend time with a dull and aging engineer at a 
place she’d outgrown years ago? : 

“You don’t really want to be here, do you?” They sat by 
| a polluted stream, throwing bread to ducks. Pokler’s stom- 
ach was upset from ersatz coffee and tainted meat. His 
head ached. : 
. “It’s here or the camp,” her face stubbornly aside. “I 
| eet really want to be anywhere. I don’t care.” 

“Tse.” 

\ “Do you like it here? Do you want to be back under 
_ your mountain? Do you talk to the elves, Franz?” 

“No, I don’t enjoy it where I am”—Franz?—“but I have, 
' Thave my job... .” 

“Yes. So do I, My job is being a prisoner. I’m a profes- 
| sional inmate. I know how to get favors, who to steal 
_ from, how to inform, how to—” 

___ Any minute she’d say it... “Please—stop it Ilse—” this 
_ time Pokler got hysterical and did slap her. Ducks sur- 
_ prised at the sharp report about-faced and waddled away. 
_ Ilse gazed back at him, no tears, eyes room after room 
| strung into the shadows of an old prewar house he could 
_ wander for years, hearing voices and finding doors, hunt- 
ing himself, his life as it might have been.... He could 


502 Gravity's RAINBOW 


not bear indifference from her. Close to losing control, 

Pokler committed then his act of courage. He quit the 
ame. 

; “If you don’t want to come back next year,” even 

though “next year” meant so little by that point in Ger- 

many, “you don’t have to. It would be better if you 

didn’t.” ; 

She knew immediately what he’d done. She pulled one 
knee up, and rested her forehead there, and thought. “Tl 
come back,” she said very quietly. 

“Your” 

“Yes. Really.” 

He did, then, let everything go, every control. He veered 
into the wind of his long isolation, shuddering terribly. He 
cried. She took his hands. The floating ducks watched. The 
sea cooled under the hazy sun. An accordion played some 
where back in the town. From behind the decaying mythi 
cal statues, sentenced children shouted to each other. 
Summer ended. 

Back at the Mittelwerke he tried, and kept trying, tc 
get into the Dora camp and find Ilse. It didn’t matter any 
more about Weissmann, The SS guards each time were 
courteous, understanding, impossible to get past. 

The work load now was incredible. Pokler was getting 
less than two hours’ sleep a day. News of the war reachec 
under the mountain only as rumors and shortages. Procure 
ment philosophy had been “triangular’—three possibk 
sources for the same part, in case one one was destroyed 
Depending what didn’t come from where, or how late i 
was, you knew which factories had been bombed, whicl 
rail connections taken out. Toward the end you had to try 
and fabricate many of the components locally. 

When Pékler had time to think, he was met by the 
growing enigma of Weissmann’s silence. To provoke him 
or the memory of him, Pékler went out of his way to tall 
to officers in Major Férschner’s security detail, looking for 
news. None of them responded to Pékler as anything more 
than a nuisance. They'd heard rumors that Weissmanr 
was no longer here but in Holland, in command of his owx 
rocket battery. Enzian had dropped out of sight, alongs 
with many key Schwarzkommando., Pékler grew more anc 
more certain that this time the game was really over, tha 


“In the Zone’ 503 


the war had caught them all, given new life-death priori- 
ties and no more leisure for torturing a minor engineer. 
He was able to relax some, move through the day’s routine, 
wait for the end, even allow himself to hope that the 
thousands in Dora would soon’ be free, among them Ilse, 
some acceptable Ilse... .- 

But in the spring, he did see Weissmann again. He woke 
from a dream of a gentle Zwolfkinder that was also Nord- 
hausen, a city of elves producing toy moon-rockets, and 
there was’ Weissmann’s face at the edge of his bunk, 
watching him. He seemed to have aged ten years, and 
Pokler hardly recognized him. 

“There isn’t much time,” Weissmann whispered. “Come 
with me.” ; ; 

' They moved through the white,: sleepless bustle of the 
_ tunnels, Weissmann walking slowly and stiffly, both men 
silent. In one of the office spaces, half a dozen others were 
waiting, along with some SS and SD. “We've already ob- . 
tained permission from your groups;” Weissmann said, “to 
release you for work on a special project. This will be the 
highest possible security. You'll be billeted separately, eat 
separately, and speak to no one who is not present in this 
room.” They all looked around to see who that might be. 
No one they knew. They looked back at Weissmann. 

He wanted a modification worked into one rocket, only 
one. Its serial number had been removed, ‘and five zeros 
painted in. Pékler knew immediately that this was what 

Weissmann had been saving him for: this was to be his 
“special destiny.” It made no sense to him: he had to de- 
velop a plastic fairing, of a certain size, with certain in- 

' sulating properties, for the propulsion section of the rocket. 
The propulsion engineer was the busiest on the project, 
rerouting steam and fuel lines, relocating hardware. What- 
ever the new device was, nobody saw it. According to 
the rumor, it was being produced elsewhere, and was nick- 
named the Schwarzgerat, because of the high secrecy sur- 

rounding it. Even the weight was classified. They were 
through inside of two weeks, and the “Vorrichtung fiir die 

Asolierung” was-on its way to the field. Pékler reported 
‘back to his regular supervisor, and the routine went on as 
before. He never saw Weissmann again. 

The first week in April, with American units supposed 


\ 
ig" 


504 Gravity’s Rainsow 


to be arriving at any moment, most of the engineers were 
packing, collecting addresses of co-workers, drinking fare- 
well toasts, drifting through the emptying bays. There was. 
a graduation feeling in the air. It was hard not to whistle 
“Gaudeamus igitur.” Suddenly the cloistered life was about 
to come to an end. 

A young SS guard, one of the last to leave, found 
Pékler in the dusty cafeteria, handed him an envelope, 
and. left without a word. It was the usual furlough form, 
superseded now by the imminent death of the Govern- 
ment—and a travel permit to Zwéolfkinder. Where the 
dates should have been, someone had written, almost 
illegibly, “after hostilities end.” On the back, in the same 
hand (Weissmann’s?) a note to Pékler. She has been re- 
leased. She will meet you there. He understood that this 
was payment for the retrofit work he’d done on the 00000. 
How long had Weissmann been keeping him deliberately 
on ice, all so he’d have a plastics man he could depend 
on, when the time came? 

On the last day, Pékler walked out the south end of the 
main tunnels. Lorries were everywhere, all engines idling, 
farewell in the spring air, tall trees sunlit green on the 
mountainsides. The Obersturmbannfiihrer was not at his 
post when Pékler went into Dora. He was not looking for 
Ilse, or not exactly. He may have felt that he ought to — 
look, finally. He was not prepared. He did not know. Had 
the data, yes, but did not know, with senses or heart. ... 

The odors of shit, death, sweat, sickness, mildew, piss, 
the breathing of Dora, wrapped him as he crept in staring 
at the naked corpses being carried out now that America 
was so close, to be stacked in front of the crematoriums, 
the men’s penises hanging, their toes clustering white and 
round as pearls. ..each face so perfect, so individual; the 
lips.stretched back.into death-grins, a whole silent audience 
caught at the punch line of the joke...and the living, 
stacked ten to a straw mattress, the weakly crying, cough- 
ing, losers.... All his vacuums, his labyrinths, had been 
the other side of this. While he lived, and drew marks on 
paper, this invisible kingdom had kept on, in the darkness 
outside... all this time. .. . Pékler vomited. He cried some. 
The walls did not dissolve—no prison wall ever did, not 
from tears, not at this finding, on every pallet, in every — 


‘ 


“In the Zone 505 


cell, that the faces are ones he knows after all, and holds 
dear as himself, and cannot, then, let them return to that 
silence. ... But what can he ever do about itP How can 
he ever keep them? Impotence, mirror-rotation of sorrow, 
works him terribly as runaway heartbeating, and with 
hardly any chances left him for good rage, or for turn- 
ing.... 
Where it was darkest and smelled the worst, Pékler 
found a woman lying, a random woman. He sat for half 
' an hour holding her bone hand. She was breathing. Be- 
fore he left, he took off his gold wedding ring and put it 
on the woman’s thin finger, curling her hand to keep it 
. from sliding off. If she lived, the ring would be good for 
: few meals, or a blanket, or a night indoors, or a ride 
ome.... 


O 


Back to Berlin, with a terrific thunderstorm blowing over 
the city. Margherita has brought Slothrop to a rickety 
wood house near the Spree, in the Russian sector. A 
burned-out KG6nigstiger tank guards the entrance, its paint 
scorched, treads’ mangled and blasted off of the drive 
sprocket, its dead monster 88 angled down to point at the 
gray river, hissing and spiculed with the rain. 
. Inside are bats nesting in the rafters, remains of beds 
- with a moldy smell, broken glass and bat shit on the bare 
! wood floor, windows boarded up except where the stove 
is vented through because the chimney’s down. On a rock- 
_ ing chair lies a moleskin coat, a taupe cloud. Paint from 
some long-ago artist is still visible over the floor in wrin- 
Kled splashes of aged magenta, saffron, steel blue, reverse 
deformations of paintings whose whereabouts are unknown. 
_ Back in a corner hangs a tarnished mirror, birds and flow- 
ers painted in white all around its frame, reflecting Mar- 
gherita and Slothrop and the rain out the open door. Part 
of the ceiling, blown away when the King Tiger died, is 
covered now with soggy and stained cardboard posters ‘all 
_ of the same cloaked figure in the broad-brimmed hat, with 
its legend per FEIND HORT zU. Water drips through in half 
a dozen places. 


506 Gravity's Ramnsow 


Greta lights a kerosene lamp. It warms the rainlight 
with a handful of yellow. Slothrop builds a fire in the stove 
while Margherita ducks down under the house, where it 
turns out there’s a great stash of potatoes. Jeepers, Slothrop 
hasn’t seen a potato for months. There’s onions in a sack 
too, and even wine. She cooks, and they both sit there 
just pigging on those spuds. Later, without parap 
or talk, they fuck each other to sleep. But a few hours 
later Slothrop wakes up, and lies there wondering where 
he’s going. 

Well, to find that Siure Bummer, soon as this rain lets up, 
give the man his hashish. But what then? Slothrop and 
the S-Geridt and the Jamf/Imipolex mystery have grown to 
be strangers. He hasn’t really thought about them for a 
while. Hmm, when was that? The day he sat with Saéure 
in the café, smoking that reefer...oh, that was day be- 
fore yesterday, wasn’t it? Rain drips, soaking into the 
floor, and Slothrop perceives that he is losing his mind. 
If there is something comforting—teligious, if you want— 
about paranoia, there is still also anti-paranoia, where | 
nothing is connected to anything, a condition not many of | 
us can bear for long, Well right now Slothrop feels him- 
self sliding onto the anti-paranoid part of his cycle, feels | 
the whole city around him going back roofless, vulnerable, | 
uncentered as he is, and only pasteboard images now of | 
the Listening Enemy left between him and the wet sky. | 

Either They have put him here for a reason, or he’s | 
just here. He isn’t sure that he wouldn’t, actually, rather | 
have that reason... ree = 

The rain lets up at midnight. He leaves Margherita to | 
creep out in the cold city with his five kilos, having kept | 
for himself the one Tchitcherine plundered from. Russian 
troops are singing in their billets. The salt ache of ac 
cordion music cries on in back of them. Drunks materialize, 
merry and pissing in the center grooves of cobbled alleys. 
Mud occupies some streets like flesh. res craters brim 
with rainwater, gleaming in the lights of midwatch work 
créws clearing "debris. Shattered Biedermeier chair, mate- 
less boot, steel eyeglass frame, dog collar (eyes at the 
edges of the twisting trail watching her for blazing), 
wine cork, splintered broom, bicycle with one wheel miss- 
ing, discarded copies of Tégliche Rundschau, chalcedony 


In the Zone 507 


doorknob dyed blue long ago with ferrous ferrocyanide, 
scattered piano keys (all white, an octave on B to be 
_ exact—or H, in the German nomenclature—the notes of 
'| the rejected Locrian mode), the black and amber eye from 
| some stuffed animal. ... The strewn night. Dogs, spooked 
| and shivering, run behind walls whose tops are broken 
|. like fever charts. Somewhere a gas leak warps for a minute 
| into the death and after-rain smells. Ranks of blackened 
|, window-sockets run high up the sides. of gutted apart- 
| ment buildings. Chunks of concrete are held aloft by iron 
‘| reinforcing rod that curls like black spaghetti, whole enor- 
‘| mnous heaps wiggling ominously overhead at your least 
| passing brush by.... The smooth-faced Custodian of the 
‘| Night hovers behind neutral eyes and smile; coiled and 
‘| pale over the city, humming its hoarse lullabies. Young 
-/) men spent the Inflation like this, alone in the street, no place 
to go into out of the black winters. Girls stayed up late on 
Stcops or stitting on benches in lamplight by the rivers, 
| waiting for business, but the young men had to walk by, 
.. ignored, hunching overpadded shoulders, money with no 
| relation to anything it could buy, swelling, paper cancer in 
| their billfolds. ... 

The Chicago Bar is being guarded outside by two of 
| their descendants, kids in George Raft suits, many sizes too 
' big, too many ever to grow into. One keeps coughing, in 

uncontrolled dying spasms. The other licks his lips and 
| Stares at Slothrop. Gunsels. When he mentions Saure 
| Bummer’s name, they move together in front of the door, 
: _ shaking their heads. “Look, I’m supposed to deliver him a 
| package.” 

“Don’t know him.” | 
“Can I leave a message?” 
| “He’s not here.” The cougher makes a lunge. Slothrop 
| sweeps aside, gives him a quick veronica with his cape, 
| sticks his foot out and trips the kid, who lies on the ground 
| cursing, all tangled up in his long keychain, while his 
| pardner goes pawing inside of his flapping suitcoat for 
| what Slothrop surmises to be a sidearm, so him Slothrop 
| Kicks in the balls, and screaming “Fickt nicht mit der 
| Raketemensch!” so they'll remember, kind of a hiyo Silver 
| here, he flees into shadows, among the heaps of lumber, _ 
stone and earth. 
Da 


) 


508 Gravity's RaInsow 


He takes a trail he thinks Sadure led them along the 
other night—keeps losing it, wandering into windowless 
mazes, tangles of barbed wire holidayed by the death- 
storms of last May, then into a strafed and pitted lorry- 
park he can’t find his way out of for half an hour, a rolling 
acre of rubber, grease, steel, and spilled petrol, pieces of 
vehicles pointing at sky or earth no differently than in a 
peacetime American junkyard, fused into odd, brown 
Saturday Evening Post faces, except that they are not 
folksy so much as downright sinister...yes it’s really 
the Saturday Evening Post, all right: they are the faces 
of the tricorned messengers coming in from out of the 
long pikes, down past the elms, Berkshire legends, travelers 
lost at the edge of the Evening. Come with a message. 
They unwrinkle, though, if you keep looking. They smooth 
out into timeless masks that speak their entire meaning, all 
of it right out on the surface. 

It takes an hour to find Saure’s cellar. But it’s ‘dork and 
it’s empty. Slothrop goes in, lights the light. Looks like 
either a bust or a gang war: printing press vanished, 
clothes tossed all around, and some very strange clothes at 
that, there is, for example, a wickerware suit, a yellow 
wickerware suit actually, articulating along armpit, elbow, 
knee and groinlines...oh, hmm, well, Slothrop runs a 
quick search of his own here, looking inside shoes, not 
really shoes, some of them, but footgloves with individual 
toes, not, however, sewn but cast from some unpleasant 
variegated resin such as bowling balls are made of... 
behind the peeling scraps of wallpaper, up in the rolled-up 
windowshade, among the hatchings of one or two phony 
Reichsmarks let spill by the looters—fifteen minutes of 
this, finding nothing... and the white object on the table 
watching him out of its staring shadows the whole time. 
He feels its stare before he spots it finally: a chesspiece 
two inches high. A white knight, molded out of plastic— 
a-and wait’ll Slothrop finds out what kind of plastic, boy! 

It’s a horse’s skull: the eye-sockets are hollow far down 
into the base. Inside one of them is a tightly rolled ciga- 
rette paper with a message from Saure. |\“Raketemensch! 
Der Springer asks me to give you this, is symbol. Keep 
it—by it shall he know you. I am at Jacobistrasse 42,ge 
Hof, number 7. As B/4, Me. IP” Now “As B/4” was John 
Dillinger’s old signoff, Everybody in the Zone this summer 


In the Zone 509 


is using it. It indicates to people how you feel about cer- 
tain things... . 

Saure has included a map showing how to get to where 
he is, It’s clear back in the British sector. Groaning, Slo- 
throp pushes on back out in the mud and early morning. 
Around the Brandenburg Gate, a slight drizzle starts up 

_ again. Chunks of the Gate still lie around in the street— 
leaning shell-spalled up in the rainy sky, its silence is 
colossal, haggard as he pads by flanking it, the Chariot 
gleaming like coal, driven and still, it is the 30th century 
and swashbuckling Rocketman has just landed here to 
tour the ruins, the high-desert traces of an ancient Euro- 
pean order.... 

The Jacobistrasse and most of its quarter, slums, sur- 
vived’ the street-fighting intact, along with its interior 

_ darkness, a masonry of shadows that will persist whether 

the sun is up or down. Number 12 is an entire block of 
tenements dating from before the Inflation, five or six 
stories and a mansarde, five or six Hinterhdfe nested one 
inside the other—boxes of a practical joker’s gift, nothing 
in the center but a last hollow courtyard smelling of the 
same cooking and garbage and piss decades old. Ha, ha! 
Slothrop moseys’ toward the first archway. Streetlight 
throws his caped shadow forward into a succession of these 
arches, each labeled with a faded paint name, Erster-Hof, 
Zweiter-Hof, Dritter-Hof u.s.w., shaped like the entrance 
to the Mittelwerke, parabolic, but more like an open 
mouth and gullet, joints of cartilage receding waiting, 
waiting to swallow... above the mouth two squared eyes, 
organdy whites, irises pitch black, stare him down... it 

- laughs as it has for years without stopping, a blubbery 

and percussive laugh, like heavy china rolling or bumping 
under the water in the sink. A brainless giggle, just big 
old geometric. me, nothin’ t’ be nervous about, cmon in. 
...But the pain, the twenty, twentyfive years of pain 
paralyzed back in that long throat . . . old outcast, passive, 
addicted to survival now, waiting the years out, waiting 
for vulnerable saps like Slothrop here to expose itself to, 
laughing and crying and all in silence... paint peels from 
the Face, burned, diseased, long time dying and how can 
Slothrop just walk down into such a schizoid throat? Why, 
because it is what the guardian and potent Studio wants 
from him, natiirlich: Slothrop is the character juvenile 


Tris 


510 Gravity’s RaiInsow 


tonight: what’s kept him moving the whole night, him and 
the others, the solitary Berliners who come out only in 
these evacuated hours, belonging and going noplace, is 
Their unexplained need to keep some marginal population 
in these wan and preterite places, certainly for economic 
though, who knows, maybe emotional reasons too.... 

Saure’s on the move too, though inside, prowling his 
dreams, It looks like one big room, dark, full of tobacco 
and kif smoke, crumbled ridges of plaster where walls 
have been knocked out, straw pallets all over the floor, a 
couple on one sharing a late, quiet cigarette, somebody 
snoring on another... glossy Bosendorfer Imperial con- 
cert grand piano over which Trudi, wearing only an army 
shirt, leans, a desperate muse, bare legs long and stretch- 
ing, “Please come to bed Gustav, it'll be light soon.” The 
only answer is a peevish strumming among the lower 
strings. Sdure is on his side, quite still, a shrunken child, 
face long worked at by leaps from second-story windows, 
“first rubdowns” under gloved and womanish sergeants’ 
fists in the precinct stations, golden light in the afternoons 
over the racetrack at Karlshorst, black light from the pave- 
ments of boulevards at night finely wrinkled like leather 
stretched over stone, white light from satin dresses, glasses 
stacked shining in front of bar mirrors, sans-serif Us at the 
entrances to underground stations pointing in smooth 
magnetism at the sky to bring down steel angels of exalta- 
tion, of languid surrender—a face that in sleep is awe- 
somely old, abandoned to its city’s history.... 

His eyes “‘open—for an instant Slothrop is only shadowed 
green folds, highlighted helmet, light-values still to be put 
together. Then comes the sweet nodding smile, everything’s 
O.K., ja, howdy Rocketman, was ist los? Though the un- 
regenerate old doper is not quite kindly enough to keep 
from opening the ditty bag right away and peering in, 
eyes like two pissholes in a snowbank, to see what he has, 

“I thought you'd be in the slam or something. e, 

Out with a little Moroccan pipe and Saure sets to Sation- 
ing a fat crumb of that hashish, ornate the populs 


rumba 


A little something fides Moroc-co, 
With just a lit-tle bit of sock-o, 


In the Zone 511 


“Oh. Well, Springer blew the whistle on our counter- 


feiting operation. Kind of a little temporary hitch, you 
understand.” 

“J don’t. You're supposed to be ace buddies.” 

“Not nearly. And he moves in higher orbits.” It is some- 
thing very complicated having to do with American yellow- 


- seal scrip being discontinued in the Mediterranean theatre, - 


with the reluctance of Allied forces here to accept Reichs- 


/ marks. Springer has a balance-of-payments problem too, 


and he’s been speculating heavily in Sterling, and... 
“But,” sez Slothrop, “but, uh, where’s my million marks, 
then, Emil?” : 
Saure sucks yellow flame flowing over the edge of the 


bowl. “It is gone where the woodbine twineth.” Exactly 


what Jubilee Jim Fisk told the Congressional committee 


‘ investigating his and Jay Gould’s scheme to corner gold 
in 1869. The words are a réminder of Berkshire. With 


nothing more than that to go on, it occurs to Slothrop that 
Saure can’t possibly be on the Bad Guys’ side. Whoever - 
They are, Their game has been to extinguish, not remind. 

“Well, I can sell by the ounce from what I have,” Slo- 
throp reckons. “For occupation scrip. That’s stable, isn’t 


pit?” 


’ How can I~ 


“You aren’t angry. You really aren’t.” 

“Rocketman is above all that shit, Emil.” 

“I have a surprise for you. I can get you the Schwarz- 
gerat you asked about.” 

“You?” 

“Springer. I asked him for you.” 

“Quit fooling. Really? Jeepers, that’s so swell of youl 

“Ten thousand. pounds sterling.” 

Slothrop loses a whole lungful of smoke. “Thanks 
Emil....” He tells Saéure about the run-in with Tchi- 


_tcherine, and also about how he saw that Mickey Rooney. 


“Rocketman! Spaceman! Welcome to our virgin planet. 
We only want to be left in some kind of peace here, O.K.? 
If you kill us, don’t eat us. If you eat, don’t digest. Let us 


| come out the other end again, like diamonds in the shit 


\ 


of smugglers... .” 


“Look”—remembering now the tip that that Geli gave 
him long ago in Nordhausen—“did your pal Springer 


512 GRAVITY’S RaInsow 


mention he was hanging out in Swinemiinde these days, 
anyplace like that?” 

“Only the price of your instrument, Rak, Half the money 
in front. He said it would cost him at least that much to 
track it down.” 

“So he doesn’t know where it is. Shit, he could have us 
all on the hook, bidding us up, hoping somebody’s fool 
enough to front him some dough.” 

“Usually he delivers. You didn’t have any trouble, did 
you, with that pass he forged?” 

“Yaaahhh—” Oh. Oh, wow, aha, yes been meaning to 
ask you about this little Max Schlepzig item here— “Now 
then.” But meantime Trudi has abandoned Gustav in the 
piano and comes over now to sit and rub her cheeks against 
the nap of Slothrop’s trousers, dear naked legs whispering 
together, hair spilling, shirt half unbuttoned, and Sdure 
has at some point rolled over and gone groaning back into 
sleep. Trudi and Slothrop retire to a mattress well away 
from the Bosendorfer. Slothrop settles back sighing, takes 
his helmet off and lets big sweet and saftig Trudi have her 
way with him. His joints are aching with rain and city 
wandering, he’s half blitzed, Trudi is kissing him into an 
amazing comfort, it’s an open house here, no favored 
senses or organs, all are equally at play...for possibly 
the first time in his life Slothrop does not feel obliged to 
have a hardon, which is just as well, because it does not 
seem to be happening with his penis as much as with... 
oh mercy, this is embarrassing but... well his nose actu- 
ally seems to be erecting, the mucus beginning to flow yes 
a nasal hardon here and Trudi has certainly noticed all 
right, how could she help but .. . as she slides her lips over 
the throbbing snoot and sends a yard of torrid tongue up 
one of his nostrils... he can feel each pink taste-bud as 
she penetrates even farther, pulling aside the vestibule walls 
and nose-hair now to accommodate her head, then shoul- 
ders and... well she’s halfway in, might as well—pulling 
up her knees, crawling using the hair for hand and foot- 
holds she is able to stand at last inside the great red hall 
which is quite pleasantly lit, no walls or\ ceiling she can 
really discern but rather a fading to seashell and springtime 
grades of pink in all directions. ... eee 

They fall asleep in the roomful of snoring, with low- 


In the Zone 513 


pitched twangs out of the piano, and the rain’s million- 
legged scuttle in the courtyards outside. When Slothrop 
wakes up it’s at the height of the Evil Hour, Trudi is in 
some other room with Gustav rattling coffee cups, a tor- 
toise-shell cat chases flies by the dirty window. Back beside 
the Spree, the White Woman is waiting for Slothrop. He 
isn’t especially disposed to leave. Trudi and Gustav come 
in with coffee and half a reefer, and everybody sits around 
- gabbing. 

Gustav is a composer. For months he has been carrying 
on a raging debate with Saure over who is better, Bee- 
thoven or Rossini. Saure is for Rossini. “I'm not so much 
for Beethoven qua Beethoven,” Gustav argues, “but as he 

represents the German dialectic, the incorporation of more 

and more notes into the scale, culminating with dodeca- 

_ phonic democracy, where all notes get an equal hearing. 
Beethoven was one of the architects of musical freedom— 
he submitted to the demands of history, despite his deaf- 
ness. While Rossini was retiring at the age of 36, woman- 
izing and getting fat, Beethoven was living a life filled 
with tragedy and grandeur.” 

“SoP” is Sdure’s customary answer to that one. “Which 
would you rather do? The point is,” cutting off Gustav's 
usually indignant scream, “a person feels good listening to 
Rossini. All you feel like listening to Beethoven is going 
out and invading Poland. Ode to Joy indeed. The man 
didn’t even have a sense of humor. I tell you,” shaking his 

' skinny old fist, “there is more of the Sublime in the snare- 
drum part to La Gazza Ladra than in the whole Ninth 
_ Symphony. With Rossini, the whole point is that lovers 
always get together, isolation is overcome, and like it or 
not that is the one great centripetal movement of the 
World. Through the machineries of greed, pettiness, and 
the abuse of power, love occurs. All the shit is transmuted 
to gold. The walls are breached, the balconies are scaled— 
listen!” It was a night in early May, and the final bombard- 
ment of Berlin was in progress. Sdéure had to shout his 
head off. “The Italian girl is in Algiers, the Barber’s in the 
crockery, the magpie’s stealing everything in sight! The 
World is rushing together. .. .” 
This rainy moming, in the quiet, it seems that Gustav’s 
_ German Dialectic has come to its end. He has just had 


: 
é 


Po 


514 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


the word, all the way from Vienna along some musicians” 
grapevine, that Anton Webern is dead. “Shot in May, by 
the Americans. Senseless, accidental if you believe in 
accidents—some mess cook from North Carolina, some 
late draftee with a .45 he hardly knew how to use, too late 
for WW II, but not for Webern. The excuse for raiding 
the house was that Webern’s brother was in the black 
market. Who isn’t? Do you know what kind of myth that’s 
going to make in a thousand years? The young barbarians 
coming in to murder the Last European, standing at the 
far end of what’d been going on since Bach, an expansion 
of music’s polymorphous perversity till all notes were 
truly equal at last.... Where was there to go after We- 
bern? It was the moment of maximum freedom. It all had 
to come down. Another Gétterdiammerung—” 

“Young fool,” Saéure now comes cackling in from out in 
Berlin, trailing a pillowcase full of flowering tops just in 
from that North Africa. He’s a mess—red-drenched eyes, 
fatbaby arms completely hairless, fly open and half the 
buttons gone, white hair and blue shirt both streaked with. 
some green horrible scum. “Fell in a shell-hole. Here, 
quick, roll up some of this.” 

“What do you mean, ‘young fool,’ ” inquires Gustav. 

“I mean you and your musical mainstreams,” cries 
Saure. “Is it finally overP Or do we have to start da capo 
with Carl Orff?” 

“I never thought of that,” sez Gustav, and for a moment 
it is clear that Sdure has heard about Webern too, and 
trying in his underhanded way to cheer Gustav up. | 

ee wrong with Rossini?” hollers Saure, lighting up. 
“FE > 

“Ugh,” screams Gustav, “ugh, ugh, Rossini,” and they're 
at it again, “you wretched antique. Why doesn’t anybody 
go to concerts any more? You think it’s because of the 
war? Oh no, I'll tell you why, old man—because the halls 
are full of people like you! Stuffed full! Half asleep, nod- 
ding and smiling, farting through their dentures, hawking 
and spitting into paper bags, dreaming up ever more 
ingenious plots against their children—not just their own, — 
_ but other people’s children too! just sitting around, at the — 
concert with all these other snow-topped old rascals, just a 
nice background murmur of wheezing, belching, intestinal 


In the Zone 515 
gurgles, scratching, sucking, croaking, an entire opera house 


crammed full of them right up to standing room, they're 


-doddering in the aisles, hanging off the tops of the highest 


balconies, and you know what they're all listening to, 


Saure? eh? They're all listening to Rossini! Sitting there 
drooling away to some medley of predictable little tunes, 


leaning forward elbows on knees muttering, ‘C’mon, c'mon 
then Rossini, let’s get all this pretentious fanfare stuff 
out of the way, let’s get on to the real good tunes! Be- 


havior as shameless as eating a whole jar of peanut butter 
at one sitting. On comes the sprightly Tancredi tarantella, 


and they stamp their feet in delight, they pop their teeth 


and pound their canes—‘Ah, ah! that’s more like it!” 
“It’s a great tune,” yells Saure back. “Smoke another 
one of these and Ill just play it for you here on the Bosen- 
dorfer.” 
To the accompaniment of this tarantella, which really i is 
a good tune, Magda has come in out of the morning rain, 


and is now rolling reefers for everybody. She hands Saure 


one to light. He stops playing and peers at it for a long 
time. Nodding now and then, smiling or frowning. 
Gustav tends to sneer, but Saure really turns out to be 
an adept at the difficult art of papyromancy, the ability to 
prophesy through contemplating the way people roll reef- 
ers—the shape, the licking pattern, the wrinkles and folds 


or absence thereof in the paper. “You will soon be in 


love,” sez Saure, “see, this line here.” 


“It’s long, isn’t it? Does that mean—” 

“Length is usually intensity, Not time.” 

“Short but sweet,” Magda sighs, “Fabelhaft, wasP” Trudi 
comes over to hug her. They are a Mutt and Jeff routine, 
Trudi in heels is a foot or so taller. They know how it 
looks, and travel around in the city together whenever 
they can, by way of intervening, if only for a minute, in 

people’s minds. 
“How do you like this shit?” sez Saure. 

“Hiibsch,” allows Gustav. “A trifle stahlig, and perhaps 
_the SiGaitenimal hint ok 2 Bodengeschmack behind its 
' K6rper, which is admittedly siiffig.” 


“TI would rather have said spritzig,” Sdure disagrees, if 
_ that indeed is what it is. “Generally more bukettreich 
. than last year’s harvests, wouldn’t you say?” 


acs 


bi 


4 
v 


en = 


G 


» 


516 Gravity's RaInBow 


“Oh, for an Haut Atlas herbage it does have its Art. 
Certainly it can be described as kernig, even—as can often 
be said of that sauber quality prevailing in the Oued Nfis 
region—authentically pikant.” 

“Actually I would tend to suspect an origin es ents 
along the southern slope of Jebel Sarho,” Saure sez—“note 
the Spiel, rather glatt and blumig, even the suggestion of a 
Fiille in its wiirzig audacity—” 

“No no no, Fiille is overstating it, the El Abid Emerald 
we had last month had Fiille. But this is obviously more 
zart than that.” 

The truth is they are both so blitzed that neither one 
knows what he’s talking about, which is just as well, for 
at this point comes a godawful hammering at the door and 
a lot of achtungs from the other side. Slothrop screams 
and heads for the window, out onto the roof and over, 
scrambling down a galvanized pipe to the next streetward 
courtyard. Back in Sdure’s room the heat come busting in. 
Berlin police supported by American MPs in an adviser 
status. 

“You will show me your papers!” hollers the leader of 
the raid. 

Sdure smiles and holds up a pack of Zig-Zags, just in 
from Paris. 

Twenty minutes later, somewhere in the American sec- 
tor, Slothrop is ambling past a cabaret where blank-faced 
snowdrops are lounging in front and inside, and a radio or 
phonograph somewhere is playing an Irving Berlin medley. 
Slothrop goes hunching paranoiacally along the street, here’s 
“God Bless America,” a-and “This Is the Army, Mister 
Jones,” and they are his country’s versions of the Horst 
Wessel Song, although it is Gustav. back at the Jacobi- 
strasse who raves (nobody gonna pull an Anton Webern 
on him) to a blinking American lieutenant-colonel, “A 
parabola! A trap! You were never immune over there from 
the simple-minded German symphonic are, tonic to domi- 
nant, back again to tonic. Grandeur! Gesellschaft!” 

“Teutonic?” sez the colonel. “Dominant The war’s over, 
fella. What kind of talk is that?” 

In from the soggy fields of the Mark comes a id 
drizzle blowing. Russian cavalry are crossing the 
stendamm, driving a herd of cows to slaughter lowing aad 


ie | de In the Zone 517 


‘muddy, eyelashes beaded with the fine rain, In the Soviet 
sector, girls with rifles slung across bouncing wool-covered 
breasts are waving the traffic around with bright orange 
pennants. Bulldozers growling, trucks straining push over 
‘teetering walls, and little kids cheer at each wet crash. 
Silver tea-services ring on fronded terraces where water 
‘drips, waiters in lean black coats wheel and tilt their 
heads. An open victoria splashes by, two Russian officers 
/ covered with medals sitting with their ladies in silk frocks 
“and great floppy-brimmed hats trailing ribbons in the 
breeze. On the river, ducks with green heads glittering 
_ drift among shock-waves of one another’s passage. Wood- 


smoke scatters out the dented pipe of Margherita’s house. 
“Inside the door, the first thing Slothrop sees is a high- 
heeled shoe come flying straight at his head, He twitches 
‘out of the way in time: Margherita is kneeling on the bed, 
breathing rapidly, staring. “You left me.” 

“Had some chores.” He rummages in covered cans on a 

shelf over the stove, finds dried clover tops for tea, 

“But you left me alone.” Her hair blows in a gray-black 
cloud around her face, She is prey to interior winds he 
never felt. 

“Only for a little while. Do you want teaP” Starting out- 

_ side with an empty can. 
_- “What’s a little while? For God’s sake, haven’t you been 

valoneP” . 

» “Sure.” Dipping up water from a rain barrel outside the 
door. She lies, shaking, her face working, helpless. 

' Slothrop puts the can on to boil. “You were sleeping 
pretty soundly, Isn’t it safe here? Is that what you mean?” 

“Safe,” A terrible laughter. He wishes she wouldn't. 'The 
_water has begun to creak, “Do you know what they were 
doing to me? What they were piling on my breasts? The 
names they were calling me?” 

_ “Who, Greta?” 

_ “When you left I woke up. I called to you but you 
didn’t come back. When they were sure you'd left, they 
came in... .” 

} “Why didn’t you try to stay awake?” 

“I was awake!” Sunlight, switched on, breaks through. 
At the harsh lighting she turns her face away. 

Ke While he makes tea, she sits on the bed, cursing him in 
Ff 

Thy 
ge 


‘ 


518 GRAVITY’s RAINBOW 


German and Italian, in a voice always just at the edge of 
ers apart. He hands her a cup. She knocks it out of his 
and. 

“Look, take it easy, all right?” He sits down next to her 
and blows on his tea. The cup she refused stays on its 
side where it is. The dark stain steams into the wood 
planks. Faraway clover rises, disperses: a ghost.... After 
a while she takes his hand, 

“Tm sorry I left you alone.” 

She starts to cry. 

And cries all day. Slothrop falls asleep, keeps drifting 
up to her sobs, and to feel her, always in touch, some part 
of her, some part of him.... In a dream from this time, 
his father has come to find him. Slothrop has been wander- 
ing at sundown by the Mungahannock, near a rotting old 
paper mill, abandoned back in the nineties. A heron rises 
in silhouette against luminous and dying orange. “Son,” a 
falling tower of words tumbling over and over themselves, 
“the president died three months ago.” Slothrop stands 
and curses him. “Why didn’t you tell me? Pop, I loved 
him. You only wanted to sell me to the IG. You sold me 
out.” The old man’s eyes fill with tears. “Oh son. . .” itry- 
ing to take his hand. But the sky is dark, the heron gone, 
the empty skeleton of the mill and the dark increase of the 
river saying it is time to go... then his father is gone too, 
no time to say good-by, though his face stays, Broderick 
who sold him out, long after waking, and the sadness Slo- 
throp brought into it, fool loudmouth kid. Margherita is 
leaning over him, brushing tears from his face with the 
tips of her nails. The nails are very sharp, and pause 
often when they approach his eyes. 

“T’'m afraid,” she whispers. “Everything. My face in the. 
mirror—when I was a child, they said not to look in the 
mirror too often or I’d see the Devil behind the glass... 
and...” glancing back at the white-flowered mirror be- 
hind them, “we have to cover it, please, can’t we cover 
it... that’s where they... especially at night—” 

“Easy.” He moves to put as much of their bodies in 
touch as he can. He holds her. The tremor is strong, and 
maybe uncalmable: after a while Slothrop has started to 
tremble too, in phase. “Please, take it easy.” Whatever 
possesses her needs touch, to drink touch insatiably. 


In the Zone 519 


The depth of this frightens him. He feels responsible for 
‘her safety, and often trapped. At first they stay together 
days at a clip, till he has to go out dealing, or foraging. 
He doesn’t sleep much. He finds himself by reflex telling 
lies—“It’s all right,” “There’s nothing to worry about.” 
Sometimes he manages to be alone out by the river, fish-. 
ing with a piece of string and one of her hairpins. They 
manage a fish a day, on lucky days two. They are goofy 
fish, anything swimming in Berlin waters these days has to 
be everybody’s last choice. When Greta cries in her sleep 
for longer than he can listen to, he has to wake her. They 
will try to talk, or to screw, though he’s less and less often 
in the mood, and that makes her worse because she feels 
he’s rejecting her, which indeed he is. Whippings seem to 
comfort her, and they let him off the hook. Sometimes he’s 
too tired even for that. She keeps provoking him. One 
night he puts in front of her a broiled fish, an unwhole- 
some yellow loach with brain damage. She can’t eat it, 
she'll get sick. z 

“You have to eat,” 

She moves her head aside, first one side, then the other. 

“Oh boy, what a sad story, listen cunt, you ain’t the only 
one’s ever suffered—you been out there lately?” 

_ “Of course. I keep forgetting how you must have suf-. 
fered.” 

“Shit you Germans are crazy, you all think the world’s 
against you.” 

“Tm not German,” just remembering, “I'm a Lombard.” 

“Close enough, sweetheart.” 

With a hiss, nostrils wide, she grabs the little table and 
wrenches it away, plates, silverware, fish flying splot 
‘against the wall where it commences to drip down toward 
the woodwork, still, even in death, getting all the lousy 
breaks. They sit in their two straight chairs, a meter and a 
half of perilously empty space between. It is the warm, 
Tomantic summer of ’45, and surrender or not, the culture 
of death still prevails: what Grandmother called “a crime 
of passion” has become, in the absence of much passion 
over anything today, the technique of preference in re- 
Solving interpersonal disputes. | 
_ “Clean it up.” 

She flicks a pale bitten thumbnail from _one of her top 


vy) 


520 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


teeth and laughs, that delightful Erdmann laugh. Slothrop, 
shaking, is about to say, “You don’t know how close you 
are—” Then, by chance, he happens to get a look at her 
face. Of course she knows how close she is. “O.K., O.K.” 
He throws her underwear around the room till he finds the 
black girdle he’s looking for. The metal clips of the sus- 
penders raise dark little curved welts over fading earlier 
bruises on her buttocks and thighs. He has to draw blood 
before she cleans up the fish. When she’s finished she 
kneels and kisses his boots. Not exactly the scenario she 
wanted but close enough, sweetheart. - 

Getting closer every day, and he’s afraid. He’s never 
seen anything like it. When he goes out to the city she 
begs to be tied with her stockings, star-fashion, to the 
bedposts. Sometimes she'll leave the house, and stay away 
for days, coming home with stories about Negro MPs beat- 
ing her with nightsticks, screwing her in the asshole, how 
much she loved it, hoping to trigger some race/sex reac- 
tion, something a little bizarre, a little different.... 

Whatever it is with her, he’s catching it. Out in the 
ruins he sees darkness now at the edges of all the broken 
shapes, showing from behind them. Light nests in Mar- 
gherita’s hair like black doves. He will look at his chalk 
hands, and along the borders of each finger, darkness will 
gutter and leap. In the sky over the Alexanderplatz he has 
seen Oberst Enzian’s KEZVH mandala, and the face of 
Tchitcherine on more than one random snowdrop. Across 
the facade of the Titaniapalast, in red neon through a mist 
one night he saw DIE, sLoTHROP. One Sunday out at 
-Wannsee, an armada of sails all bent the same way, pa- 
tiently, dreamlike into the wind, passing forever against 
the other shore, a crowd of little kids in soldier hats folded 
from old army maps plotted to drown and sacrifice him. He 
escaped only by murmuring Hauptstufe three times. 

The house by the river is an enclosure that acts as a 
spring-suspension for the day and the weather, allowing 
only mild cycling of light and heat, down into evening, up 
again into morning to the midday peak ut all damped to 
a gentle sway from the earthquake of the day outside. 

When Greta hears shots out in the increasingly distant 
streets, she will think of the sound stages of her early 
career, and will take the explosions as cue calls for the 


Sx x 


: In the Zone 521 
titanic sets of her dreams to be smoothly clogged with a 
thousand extras: meek, herded by rifle shots, ascending 
and descending, arranged into patterns that will suit the 
Director’s ideas of the picturesque—a river of faces, made 

up yellow and white-lipped for the limitations of the film 

stock of the time, sweating yellow migrations taken over 
and over again, fleeing nothing, escaping nowhere. ... 

It’s early morning now. Slothrop’s breath is white on 
the air. He is just up from’a dream. Part I of a poem, with 
woodcuts accompanying the text—a woman is attending a 
dog show which is also, in some way, a stud service. She 
has brought her Pekingese, a female with a sickeningly 
-cute name, Mimsy or Goo-Goo or something, here to be 

serviced. She is passing the time in a garden setting, with 
some other middle-class ladies like herself, when from_ 

, some enclosure nearby she hears the sound of her bitch, 
coming. The sound goes on and on for much longer than 
seems appropriate, and she suddenly realizes that the 
sound is her own voice, this interminable cry of dog- 
pleasure. The others, politely, are pretending not to notice. 
She feels shame, but is helpless, driven now by a need to 
go out and find other animal species to fuck. She sucks the 
penis of a multicolored mongrel who has tried to mount 
her in the street. Out in a barren field near a barbed-wire 
fence, winter fires across the clouds, ‘a tall horse compels 
her to kneel, passively, and kiss his hooves, Cats and minks, 
hyenas and rabbits, fuck her inside automobiles, lost at 
night in the forests, out beside a waterhole in the desert. 
_ As Part II begins, she has discovered she’s pregnant. Her 
husband, a dumb, easygoing screen door salesman, makes 
‘an agreement with her: her own promise is never stated, 
‘but in return, nine months from now, he will take her 
where she wants to go. So it is that close to the end of 
her term he is out on the river, an American river, in a 
rowboat, hauling on the oars, carrying her on a journey. 
The key color in this section is violet. 

Part III finds her at the bottom of the river. She has 
drowned. But all forms of life fill her womb. “Using her as 
Mermaid” (line 7), they transport her down through these 
green river-depths. “It was down, and out again./ Old 
Squalidozzi, ploughman of the deep,/ At the end of his 
day’s sowing/ Sees her verdigris belly among the weeds” 
ye) 


Waa 


- 


} 


522 Gravity's RAInsow 


(lines 10-13), and brings her back up. He is a classically- 
bearded Neptune figure with an old serene face. From out 
of her body streams a flood now of different creatures, 
octopuses, reindeer, kangaroos, “Who can say all the 
life/ That left her womb that day?” Squalidozzi can only 
catch a glimpse of the amazing spill as he bears her back 
toward the surface. Above, it is a mild and sunlit green 
lake or pond, grassy at the banks, shaded by willows. In- 
sects whine and hover. The key color now is green, “And 
there as it broke to sun/ Her corpse found sleep in the 
water/ And in the summer depths/ The creatures took 
their way/ Each to its proper love/ In the height of after- 
noon/ As the peaceful river went... .” 

This dream will not leave him. He baits his hook, 
hunkers by the bank, drops his line into the Spree. Pres- 
ently he lights up an army cigarette, and stays still then 
for a long while, as the fog moves white through the river- 
bank houses, and up above the warplanes go droning 
somewhere invisible, and the dogs run barking in the back- 
streets. . 


O 


When emptied of people, the interior is steel gray. When 
crowded, it’s green, a comfortable acid green. Sunlight 
comes in through portholes in the higher of the bulkheads 
(the Riicksichtslos here lists at a permanent angle of 
23°27’), and steel washbowls line the lower bulkheads. At 
the end of each sub-latrine are coffee messes and hand- 
cranked peep shows. You'll find all the older, less glam- 
orous, un-Teutonic-looking women in the enlisted men’s 
machines. The real stacked and more racially golden 
tomatoes go to the officers, natiirlich. This is some of that 
Nazi fanaticism. : 

The Riicksichtslos itself is the issue of another kind of 
fanaticism: that of the specialist. This vessel here is a 
Toiletship, a triumph of the German mania for subdivid- 
ing. “If the house is organic,” argued the crafty early 
Toiletship advocates, “family lives in the house, family’s 
organic, house is outward-and-visible sign, you see,” be- 
hind their smoked glasses and under their gray crewcuts 


In the Zone 523 


not believing a word of it, Machiavellian and youthful, 


not quite ripe yet for paranoia, “and if the bathroom’s 
part of the house—house-is-organic! ha-hah,” singing, 
chiding, pointing out the broad blond-faced engineer, hair 
parted in the middle and slicked back, actually blushing 
and looking at his knees among the good-natured smiling 


_ teeth of his fellow technologists because he’d been about 


to forget that point (Albert Speer, himself, in a gray suit 
with a smudge of chalk on the sleeve, all the way in the 


“back leaning akimbo the wall and looking remarkably like 


American cowboy actor Henry Fonda, has already for- 
gotten about the house being organic, and nobody points 


at him, RHIP). “Then the Toiletship is to the Kriegsmarine 


as the bathroom is to the house. Because the Navy is 
organic, we all know that, hahah!” [General, or maybe 


_ Admiral, laughter.] The Riicksichtslos was intended to be 


the flagship of a whole Geschwader of Toiletships. But the 
steel quotas were diverted clear out of the Navy over to 
the A4 rocket program.. Yes, that does seem unusual, but 
Degenkolb was heading up the Rocket Committee by then, 
remember, and had both power and will to cut across all 
branches of the service. So the Ricksichtslos is one-of-a- 
kind, old warship collectors, and if you're in the market 
you better hurry ’cause GE’s already been by to have a 
look. Lucky the Bolshies didn’t get it, huh, Charles? 
Charles, meantime, is making on his clipboard what look 
like studious notes, but are really observations of the 


passing ‘scene such as They are all looking at me, or 


| 
| 


; 


| Lieutenant Rinso is plotting to murder me, and of course 


the ever-reliable He’s one of them too and I'm going to 
get him some night, well by now Charles’s colleague here, 
Steve, has forgotten about the Russians, and discontinued 
his inspection of a flushing valve to take a really close 
look at that Charles, you can’t pick your search team, not 
if you're just out of school and here I am, in the asshole 
of nowhere, not much more than a gofer to this—what is 
he, a fag? What am JP What does GE want me to be? Is 


this some obscure form of company punishment, even, 
good God, permanent exile? I'm a career man, they can 


keep me out here 20 years if they want, ’n’ nobody'll ever 


know, they'll just keep writing it off to overhead. Sheilal 
How’m I gonna tell Sheila? We're engaged. This is her 


524 Gravity's Ranmow 


picture (hair waved like choppy seas falling down Rita 
Hayworth style, eyes that if it were a color snap would 
have yellow lids with pink rims, and a mouth like a hot 
dog bun on a billboard). Took her out to Buf-falo Bayou, 


Lookin’ for a little fun— 

Big old bayou mosquito, oh my you 

Shoulda seen what he donel 

Poked his head up, under her dress, 

Give a little grin and, well I guess, 

Things got rough on Buf-falo Bayou, 

Skeeter turn yer meter, down, 

All—right—now! 

Ya ta, ta-ta, ya-ta-ta, ta-ta 

Lookin’ for a little fun, 

Ev-rybody! 

Oh ya know, when you're young and wholesome 
[“Ev’rybody,” in this case a Toiletshipload of bright hornrimmed 
shoe-pac’d young fellas from Schenectady, are singin’ along behind 
this recitative here] and a good church-goin’ kid, it’s sure a mourn- 
ful thing to get suddenly ganged by a pack of those Texas mosquitoes, 
it can set you back 20 years. Why, there’s boys just like you wan- 
derin’ around, you may’ve seen one in the street today and never 
known it, with the mind of a infant, just because those mosquitoes 
got to him and did their unspeakable thing. And we’ve laid down 
insecticides, a~-and bombed the bayous with citronella, and it’s no 
good, folks. They breed fastern we can kill ’em, aad. are we just 
gonna tuck tail and let them be there out in Buffalo Bayou where my 
gal Sheila had to look at the loathsome behavior of those—things, 
we Ag wa allow them even to exist? 

—aAnd, 

Things got rough on, Buf-falo pes 

Skeeter turn yer meter, 

Hubba hubba— 44 

Skeeter turn yer meter, downl 


Well, you can’t help but wonder who’s really the more 
paranoid of the two here. Steve’s sure got a lot of gall 
badmouthing Charles that way. Among the hilarious graffiti 
of ae mathematicians, 


d — a 
A aera (cabin) (cabin) = log cabin ie e= 7 fsectbats 


that sort of flee, they go poking away the narrow 
sausage-shaped latrine now, two y old men, their 
feet fade and cease to ring on the dloping steel deck, their 
forms grow more transparent with distance until it’s im- 


In the Zone 525 


possible to see them any more. Only the empty compart- 
ment here, the S-curved spokes on the peep-show ma- 
chines, the rows of mirrors directly facing, reflecting each 
other, frame after frame, back in a curve of very great 
radius. Out to the end of this segment of curve is con- 
sidered part of the space of the Riicksichtslos. Making it a 
rather fat ship. Carrying its right-of-way along with it. 
“Crew morale,” whispered the foxes at the Ministry meet- 
ings, “sailors’ superstitions, Mirrors at high midnight. We 
know, don’t weP” 

The officers’ latrines, by contrast, are done in red velvet. 
The decor is 1930s Safety Manual. That is, all over the 
walls, photograffiti, are pictures of Horrible Disasters in 
German Naval History. Collisions, magazine explosions, 
U-boat sinkings, just the thing if you're an officer trying 
to take a shit. The Foxes have been busy. Commanding 
officers get whole suites, private shower and sunken bath- 
tub, manicurist (BDM volunteers, mostly), steam room, 
massage table. To compensate though, all the bulkheads, 
and the overhead, are occupied by enormous photographs 
of Hitler at various forms of play. The toilet paper! The 
toilet paper is covered square after square with caricatures 
of Churchill, Eisenhower, Roosevelt, Chiang Kai-shek, 
there was even a Staff Caricaturist. always on duty to 
custom-illustrate blank paper for those connoisseurs who 
are ever in search of the unusual. Wagner and Hugo Wolf 
were patched into speakers from up in the radio shack. 
Cigarettes. were free. It was a good life on board. the 
Toiletship Riicksichtslos, as it plied its way from Swine- 
miinde to Helgoland, anyplace it was needed, camouflaged 
in shades of gray, turn-of-the-century style with sharp- 
shadowed prows coming at you from midships so you 
couldn’t tell which way she was headed. Ship’s company 
actually lived each man inside his stall, each with his own 
key and locker, pin-ups and library shelves decorating the 
partitions ,.. and there were even one-way mirrors so you 
could sit at your ease, penis dangling toward the ice-cold 
seawater in your bowl, listen to your VE-301 People’s 
Receiver, and watch the afternoon rush, the busy ringing 
of feet and talk, card games inside the group toilets, deal- 
ers enthroned on real porcelain receiving visitors, some of 

_ them lined up back outside the compartment (quiet 


~ 


526 Gravity's RAINBOW 


queues, all business, something like the queues in banks), 
toilet-lawyers dispensing advice, all kinds of visitor coming 
and going, the U-boat crews hunching in, twitching eyes 
nervously every second or two at the. overhead, destroyer 
sailors larking at the troughs (gigantic troughs! running 
the whole beam of the ship, even, legend has it, off into 
mirror-space, big enough to seat 40 or 50 aching assholes 
side by side, while a constant river of salt flushing water 
roared by undemeath), lighting wads of toilet paper, is 
what they especially liked to do, setting them flaming 
yellow in the water upstream and cackling with glee as 
one by one down the line the sitters leaped off the holes 
screaming and clutching their blistered asses and inhaling 
the smell of singed pubic hair. Not that the crew of the 
Toiletship itself were above a practical joke now and then. 
Who can ever forget the time shipfitters. Hépmann and 
Kreuss, at the height of the Ptomaine Epidemic of 1943, 
routed those waste lines into the ventilation system of the 
executive officer’s stateroom? The exec, being an old 
Toiletship hand, laughed good-naturedly at the clever 
prank and transferred Hépmann and Kreuss to icebreaker 
duty, where the two Scatotechnic Snipes went on to erect 
vaguely turd-shaped monoliths of ice and snow all across 
the Arctic. Now and then one shows up on an ice floe 
drifting south in ghostly grandeur, exciting the admiration 
of all. 

A good ship, a good crew, Merry Xmas and turn to. 
Horst Achtfaden, late of the Elektromechanische Werke, 
Karlshagen (another cover name for the testing station at 
Peenemiinde), has really no time for naval nostalgia. With 
the technical spies of three or four nations after him, he 
has had the disastrous luck to’ve been picked up by the 
Schwarzkommando, who for all he knows now constitute 
a nation of their own. They have interned him in the 
Chiefs’ Head, He has watched voluptuous Gerda and her _ 
Fur Boa go through the same number 178 times (he has _ 
jimmied the coin box and figured a way to override it) 
since they put him in here, and the thrill is gone. What do 
they want? Why are they occupying a derelict in the 
middle of the Kiel Canal? Why don’t the British do some- 
thing about this? eae | 

Look at it this way, Achtfaden. This Toiletship here’s 


In the Zone 527 


_a wind tunnel’s all it is. If tensor analysis is good enough 
for turbulence, it ought to be good enough for history. 
There ought to be nodes, critical points ... there ought to 
be super-derivatives of the crowded and insatiate flow 

_ that can be set equal to zero and these critical points 
found. ... 1904 was one of them—1904 was when Admiral 
Rozhdestvenski sailed his fleet halfway around the world 
to relieve Port Arthur, which put your present captor 
Enzian on the planet, it was the year the Germans all but 
wiped out the Hereros, which gave Enzian some peculiar 
ideas about survival, it was the year the American Food 
and Drug people took the cocaine out of Coca-Cola, which 
gave us an alcoholic and death-oriented generation of 

’ Yanks ideally equipped to fight WW II, and it was the 
year Ludwig Prandtl proposed the boundary layer, which 

’ really got aerodynamics into business and. put you right 
here, right now. 1904, Achtfaden. Ha, ha! That’s a better 
joke on you than any singed asshole, all right. Lotta good 
it does you. You can’t swim upstream, not under the pres- 
ent dispensation’ anyhow, all you can do is attach the 
number to it and suffer, Horst, fella. Or, if you can tear 
yourself away from Gerda and her Fur Boa, here’s a 
thought—find a non-dimensional coefficient for yourself. 
This is a wind-tunnel youre in, remember? You're an 
aerodynamics man. So— 

Coefficients, ja, ja.... Achtfaden flings himself discon- 
solately on the scarlet VD toilet way down at the very 
| end of the row. He knows about coefficients. In Aachen 

- once, for a while, he and his colleagues could stand in the 
forward watchtower: look out into the country of the 

* barbarians through Hermann and Wieselsberger’s tiny 
window. Terrific compressions, diamond shadows writhing 
like snakes. Often the sting was bigger than the model 
itself—the very need to measure interfered with the ob- 

servations. That should have been a clue right there. No 
one wrote then about supersonic flow. It was surrounded 
by myth, and by a pure, primitive terror. Professor Wagner 
of Darmstadt predicted that at speeds above Mach 5, air 

_ would liquefy. Should pitch and roll frequencies happen 
to be equal, the resonance would throw the projectile into 
violent oscillations. It would corkscrew to destruction. 

“Lunar motion,” we called it. “Bingen pencils” we would 


} 
a 


528 Gravirty’s Rainsow 


call the helical contrails in the sky. Terrified. The Schlieren 
shadows danced. At Peenemiinde the test section measured 
40 X 40 cm, about the size of a tabloid page. “They pray 
not only for their daily bread,” Stresemann had said, “but 
also for their daily illusion.” We, staring through the thick 
glass, had our Daily Shock—the only paper many of us 
read, 

You come in—just hit town, here in the heart of down- 
town Peenemiinde, hey, whatcha do for fun around here? 
hauling your provincial valise with a few shirts, a copy of 
the Handbuch, perhaps Cranz’s Lehrbuch der Ballistik. 
You have memorized Ackeret, Busemann, von K4rm4n and 
Moore, some Volta Congress papers. But the terror will not 
go away. This is faster than sound, than the words she 
spoke across the room so full of sunlight, the jazz band 
on the radio when you could not sleep, the hoarse Heils 
among the pale generators and from the executive-crammed 
galleries overhead...the Gomerians whistling from the 
high ravines (terrific falls, steepness, whistling straight 
down the precipice to a toy village lying centuries, miles 
below...) as you sat out on the counter of the KdF ship 
alone, apart from the maypole dancing on the white deck, 
the tanned bodies full of beer and song, paunches in 
sunsuits, and you listened to Ur-Spanish, whistled not 
voiced, from the mountains around Chipuda... Gomera 
was the last piece of land Columbus touched before 
America. Did he hear them too, that last night? Did they 
have a message for him? A warning? Could he understand 
the prescient goatherds in the dark, up in the Canarian 
holly and the faya, gone dead green in the last sunset of 
Europe? 

In aerodynamics, because you’ve only got the thing on 
paper at first, you use dimensionless coefficients: ratios of 
this to that—centimeters, grams, seconds neatly all cancel- 
ing out above and below. This allows you to use models, 


arrange an airflow to measure what you're interested in, _ 


and scale the wind-tunnel results all the way up to reality, 
without running into too many unknowns, because these 
coefficients are good for all dimensions. Traditionally they 
are named after people—Reynolds, Prandtl, Péclet, Nus- 
selt, Mach—and the question here is, how about an Acht- 
faden number? How’s chances for that? 


Not good. The parameters breed like mosquitoes in the ; 


In the Zone 529 


bayou, faster than he can knock them off. Hunger, com- 
promise, money, paranoia, memory, comfort, guilt. Guilt 
gets a minus sign around Achtfaden though, even if it is 
becoming quite a commodity in the Zone. Remittance men 
from all over the world will come’to Heidelberg before 
long, to major in guilt. There will be bars and nightclubs 


catering especially to guilt enthusiasts. Extermination 


camps will be turned into tourist attractions, foreigners 
with cameras will come piling through in droves, tickled 
and shivering with guilt. Sorry—not for Achtfaden here, 
shrugging at all his mirror-to-mirror replications chaining 
out to port and starboard—he only worked with it up to 
the point where the air was too thin to make a difference. 
What it did after that was none of his responsibility. Ask 
Weichensteller, ask Flaum, and Fibel—they were the re- 


' entry people. Ask the guidance section, they pointed it 


where it was going... . 

“Do you find it a little schizoid,” aloud now to all the 
Achtfaden fronts and backs, “breaking a flight profile up 
into segments of responsibility? It was half bullet, half 
artow. It demanded this, we didn’t. So. Perhaps you used 
a rifle, a radio, a typewriter. Some’ typewriters in White- 


hall, in the Pentagon, killed more civilians than our little 


A4 could have ever hoped to. You are-either alone abso- 
lutely, alone with your own death, or you take part in the 


. larger enterprise, and you share in the deaths of others. 


Are'we not all one? Which is your choice,” Fahringer now, 


_ buzzing and flat through the filters of memory, “the little 


cart, or the great one?” mad Fahringer, the only one of the 


. Peenemiinde club who refused to wear the exclusive 


pheasant-feather badge in his hatband because he couldn’t 
bring himself to kill, who could be seen evenings on the 


beach sitting in full lotos position staring into the setting 


sun, and who was first at Peenemiinde to fall to the SS, 
taken away one noon into the fog, his lab coat a flag of 
surrender, presently obscured by the black uniforms, 
leather and metal of his escort. Leaving behind a few joss 
sticks, a copy of the Chinesische Blatter fiir Wissenschaft 


_und Kunst, pictures of a wife and children no one had 


known about... was Peenemiinde his mountain, his cell 
and fasting? Had he found his way free of guilt, fashion- 


hy) sable guilt? 


RaW 


“Atmen ...atman...not only to breathe, but also the 


530 Gravity’s RaInsow 


soul, the breath of God...” one of the few times Acht- 
faden can remember talking with him alone, directly, 
“atmen is a genuinely Aryan verb. Now tell me about the 
speed of the exhaust jet.” 

“What do you want to know? 6500 feet per second.” 

“Tell me how it changes.” 

“Tt remains nearly constant, through the burning.” 

“And yet the relative airspeed changes drastically, 
doesn’t itP Zero up to Mach 6, Can’t you see what’s hap- 
pening?” 

“No, Fahringer.” 

“The Rocket creating its own great wind .no wind 
without both, Rocket and atmosphere... but “inside the 
venturi, breath—furious and blazing breath—always flows 
at the same unchanging speed . .. can’t you really see?” 

Gibberish. Or else a koan that Achtfaden isn’t equipped 
to master, a transcendent puzzle that could lead him to 
some moment of light... almost as good as; 

—What is it that flies? 

—Los| 

Rising from the Wasserkuppe, rivers Ullster and Rese 
tilting around into map-shapes, green valleys and moun- 
tains, the four he has left below gathering up the white 
shock cords, only one looking up, shading his eyes—Bert 
Fibel? but what does the name matter, from this vantage? 
Achtfaden goes looking for the thunderstorm—under, 
through the thunder playing to a martial tune inside his 
head—crowding soon in gray cliffs to the right, the 
strokes of lightning banging all the mountains blue, the 
cockpit briefly filled with the light... right at the edge. 
Right here, at the interface, the air will be rising, You 
follow the edge of the storm, with another sense—the 
flight-sense, located nowhere, filling all your nerves... as __ 
long as you stay always right at the edge Siete: fair 
lowlands and the madness of Donar it does not fail you, 
whatever it is that flies, this carrying drive toward—is it 
freedom? Does no one recognize what enslavement gravity _ 
is till he reaches the interface of the thunder? | 

No time to work out puzzles. Here come the Schwarz- 
kommando. Achtfaden has wasted too much time with — 
luscious Gerda, with memories, Here they come clattering _ 
down the ladders, fast oogabooga talk he can’t even guess _ 

at, it’s a linguistic ‘wilderness here, and he’s afraid. What do _ 


In the Zone 531 


_ they want? Why won’t they leave him in peace—they 
_ have their victory, what do they want with poor Acht- 
faden? : 

They want the Schwarzgerit. When Enzian actually 
pronounces the word aloud, it’s already redundant. It was 
there in his bearing, the line of his mouth. The others back 
him, rifles slung, half a dozen African faces, mobbing the 
mirrors with their darkness, their vein-heavy red-white- 
and-blue eyes. 

“T only was assigned to part of it. It was trivial. Really.” 
“Aerodynamics isn’t trivial,” Enzian calm, unsmiling. 
“There were others from Gessner’s section. Mechanical 

design. I always worked out of Prof.-Dr. Kurzweg’s shop.” 

“Who were the others?” 

“I don’t remember.” 

“So: 

“Don’t hit me. Why should I hide anything? It’s the 
truth. They kept us cut off. I didn’t know anybody at 
Nordhausen. Just a few in my own work section. I swear it. 
The S-Gerat people were all strangers to me. Until that 
first day we all met with Major Weissmann, I'd never seen 
any of them. No one used real names. We were given 
code-names. Characters from a movie, somebody said. The 
other aerodynamics people were ‘Spérri’ and ‘Hawasch.’ I 
was called “Wenk.’” 

“What was your job?” 

“Weight control. All they wanted from me was the shift 
-, in C@ for a device of a given weight. The weight was 
. classified top secret. Forty-something kilos. 45? 46?” 

: “Station numbers,” raps Andreas from over Enzian’s 
’ shoulder. 

- “T can’t remember. It was in the tail section. I do re- 

_ member the load was assymmetrical about the longitudinal 

_ axis. Toward Vane III. That was the vane used for yaw 

 control—” 

“We know that.” 

“You'd have to talk to ‘Spérri’ or ‘Hawasch.’ They'd be - 
ie the ones who worked that problem out. Talk to Guidance.” 
Re Why did I say— 
| “Why did you say that?” 

“No, no, it wasn’t my job, that’s all, guidance, warhead, 

e OPQ opulsion . . ask them. Ask the others.” 
“You meant something else, Who worked on guidance?” 


“| 


532 Gravity's Rainsow 


“T told you, I didn’t know any of their names.” The 
dust-covered cafeteria in the last days: The machinery in 
the adjoining halls, that once battered eardrums pitiless as 
a cold-chisel day and night, is silenced. The Roman nu- 
merals on the time clocks stare from the walls of the bays, 
among the glass windowpanes. Telephone jacks on black 
rubber cords dangle from brackets overhead, each connec- 
tion hanging over its own desk, all the desks perfectly 
empty, covered with salt-dust sifted from the ceiling, no 
phones to plug in, no more words to be said. ... The face 
of his friend across the table, the drawn and sleepless 
face now too pointed, too lipless, that once vomited beer 
on Achtfaden’s hiking boots, whispering now, “I couldn’t 
go with von Braun... not to the Americans, it would only 
just keep on the same way...I want it really to be over, 
that’s all... good-by, ‘Wenk.’” 

“Stuff him down the waste lines,’ Andreas suggests. 
They are all so black, so sure. ... 

I must be the last one... somebody’s sure to have him 
by now... what can these Africans do with a name... 
they could have got it from anybody... . 

“He was a friend. We knew each other before the war, 
at Darmstadt.” ete: 

“We're not going to hurt him. We're not going to hurt 
you. We want the S-Gerit.” 

“Narrisch. Klaus Narrisch.” A new parameter for his 
self-coefficient now: betrayal. ; 

As he leaves the Riicksichtslos, Achtfaden can hear be- 
hind him, metallic, broadcasting from another world, 
ripped by static, a radio voice. “Oberst Enzian. M’oka- | 
manga. M’okamanga. M’okamanga.” There is urgency 
and gravity in the word. He stands by the canalside, 
among steel wreckage and old men ‘in the dusk, waiting 
for a direction to go. But where is the electric voice now 
that will ever call for him? 
| 
ea | 
They have set out by barge along the Spree-Oder Canal, 
headed at last for Swinemiinde, Slothrop to see what Geli. 
Tripping’s clew will lead him to in the way of a Schwarz- 


O 


In the Zone 533 


gerat, Margherita to rendezvous with a yachtful of refugees 
from the Lublin regime, among whom ought to be her 
_ daughter Bianca. Stretches of the canal are still blocked— 
in the night Russian demolition crews can be heard blast- 
ing away. the wrecks with TNI—but Slothrop and Greta 
can summon, like dreamers, draft shallow enough to clear 
whatever the War has left in their way. Off and on it 
rains. The sky will begin to cloud up about noon, turning 
the color of wet cement—then wind, sharpening, colder, 
- then rain that must be often at the edge of sleet, blowing 
at them head-on up the canal, They shelter under tarps, 
among bales and barrels, tar, wood and straw smells. 
| When the nights are clear, peepers-and-frogs nights, star- 


streaks and shadows at canalside will set travelers’ eyes to 

jittering. Willows line the banks. At midnight coils of fog 
_ Tise to dim out even the glow of the bargee’s pipe, far 

away up, or down, the dreaming convoy. These nights, 
fragrant and grained as pipesmoke, are tranquil and good 
_ for sleep, The Berlin madness is behind, Greta seems less 
| afraid, perhaps all they needed was to be on the move. 
. But one afternoon, sliding down the long mild slope: of 
the Oder toward the Baltic Sea, they catch sight of a little 
| red and white resort town, wiped through in broad 
_ smudges by the War, and she clutches to Slothrop’s arm. 
“Te been here...” 
“Yeah?” 
“Just before the Polish invasion...I was here with 

Sigmund ... at the spa....” 

On shore, behind cranes and steel railings, rise fronts of 
what were restaurants, small factories, hotels, burned now, 
windowless, powdered with their own substance. The 

_ name of the town is Bad Karma. Rain from earlier in the 
day has streaked the walls, the pinnacles of waste and the 
coarse-cobbled lanes. Children and old men stand on shore 
waiting to take lines and warp the barges in. Black dump- 
lings of smoke are floating up out of the stack of a white 
river steamer. Shipfitters are slamming inside its hull. Greta 

_ Stares at it. A pulse is visible in her throat. She takes her 
__ head. “I thought it was Bianca’s ship, but it isn’t.” 

In close to the quay, they swing ashore, grabbing on to 
_ an iron ladder held in the old stone by rusted bolts, each 

_ one staining the wall downward in a wet sienna fan, On 

hoy 
ae 


ie: 


| 


534 Gravity’s Rainsow 


Margherita’s jacket a pink gardenia has begun to shake. 
It isn’t the wind. She keeps saying, “I have to see... .” 

Old men are leaning on railings, smoking pipes, watch- 
ing Greta or looking out at the river. They wear gray 
clothes, wide-bottom trousers, wide-brim hats with rounded 
crowns. The market square is busy and neat: tram tracks 
gleam, there’s a smell of fresh hosing down. In the ruins 
lilacs bleed their color, their surplus life out over the 
broken stone and brick. 

Except for a few figures in black, sitting out in the sun, 
the Spa itself is deserted. Margherita by now is spooked 
as badly as she ever was in Berlin. Slothrop tags along, 
in his Rocketman turnout, feeling burdened. The Sprudel- 
hof is bounded on one side by a sand-colored arcade: sand 
columns and brown shadows. A strip just in front is 
planted to cypresses. Fountains in massive stone bowls are 
leaping: jets 20 feet high, whose shadows across the 
smooth paving of the courtyard are thick and nervous. 

But who’s that, standing so rigid by the central spring? 
And why has Margherita turned to stone? The sun is out, 
there are others watching, but even Slothrop now is bris- 
tling along his back and flanks, chills flung one on, the 
' fading cluster of another, up under each side of his jaw 
...the woman is wearing a black coat, a crepe scarf cov- 
ering her hair, the flesh of thick calves showing through 
her black stockings as nearly purple, she is only leaning 
over the waters in a very fixed way and watching them 
as they try to approach... but the smile... across ten 
meters of swept courtyard, the smile growing confident in 
the very white face, all the malaise of a Europe dead and 
gone gathered here in the eyes black as her clothing, black 
and lightless. She knows them. Greta has turned, and tries 
to hide her face in Slothrop’s shoulder. “By the well,” is 
she whispering this? “at sundown, that woman in 
-black. ...” s 20 

“Come on. It’s all right.” Back to Berlin talk. “She’s just 
a patient here.” Idiot, idiot—before he can stop her she’s 
pulled away, some quiet, awful cry in the back of her 
throat, and tured and begun to run, a \desperate tattoo 
of high heels across the stone, into the shadowed arches of 
the Kurhaus. Mae Si: 

“Hey,” Slothrop, feeling queasy, accosts the woman in 
black. “What’s the big idea, lady?” 


In the Zone 535 


But her face has changed by now, it is only the face of 
another woman of the ruins, one he would have ignored, 
passed over. She smiles, all right, but in the forced and 
business way he knows. “Zigaretten, bitte?” He gives her 
a long stub he’s been saving, and goes looking for Mar- 
gherita. 

He finds the arcade empty. All the doors of the Kurhaus 
are locked. Overhead passes a skylight of yellow panes, 
many of them fallen out. Down the corridor, fuzzy patches - 
of afternoon sun stagger along, full of mortar dust. He 
climbs a broken flight of steps that end in the sky. Odd 
chunks of stone clutter the way, From the landing at the 
top, the Spa stretches to country distances: handsome trees, 
graveyard clouds, the blue river. Greta is nowhere in 
sight. Later he will figure out where it was she went. By 

_ then they will be well on board the Anubis, and it will 
_ only make him feel more helpless. 

He keeps looking for her till the darkness is down and 
he’s come back by the river again. He sits at an open-air 
café strung with yellow lights, drinking beer, eating 
spaetzle and soup, waiting. When she materializes it is a 
shy fade-in, as Gerhardt von Géll must have brought her 
on a time or two, not moving so much as Slothrop’s own 
vantage swooping to her silent closeup stabilized presently 
across from him, finishing his beer, bumming a cigarette. 
Not only does she avoid the subject of the woman by the 
spring, she may have lost the memory already. 

“I went up in the observatory,” is what she has to say 
finally, “to look down the river. She’s coming. I saw the 
boat she’s on. It’s only a kilometer away.” 

“The what now?” - 

“Bianca, my child, and my friends. I thought they’d 
have been in Swinemiinde long ago. But then nobody’s on 
timetables any more... .” 

Sure enough, after two more bitter cups of aco coffee 
and another cigarette, here comes a cheerful array of 
lights, red, green, and white, down the river, with the 

‘faint wheeze of an accordion, the thump of a string bass, 

_ and the sound of women laughing. Slothrop and. Greta 
walk down to the quay, and through mist now beginning 
_to seep up off the river they can make out an ocean-going 

_ yacht, nearly the color of the mist, a gilded winged jackal 

_ under the bowsprit, the weather-decks crowded with chat- 

ia) 

AeA 


536 Gravity's Rainsow 


tering affluent in evening dress. Several people have 
spotted Margherita. She waves, and they point or wave 
back, and call her name. It is a moving village: all sum- 
mer it has been sailing these lowlands just as Viking ships 
did a thousand years ago, though passively, not maraud- 
ing: seeking an escape it has not yet defined clearly. 
_ The boat comes in to the quay, the crew lower an 
access ladder. Smiling passengers halfway down are al- 
ready stretching out gloved and ringed hands to Mar- 
gherita. 

“Are you coming?” 

“Uh... Well, should I?” 

She shrugs and turns her back, steps gingerly off the 
landing and on board, skirt straining and glossy a moment 
in the yellow light from the café. Slothrop dithers, goes to 
follow her—at the last moment some joker pulls the 
ladder up and the boat moves away, Slothrop screams, 
loses his balance and falls in the river. Head first: the 
Rocketman helmet is pulling him straight down, He tugs 
it off and comes up, sinuses burning and vision blurred, 
the white vessel sliding away, though the churning screws 
are moving his direction, beginning to suck at the cape, so 
he has to get rid of that, too, He backstrokes away and 
then cautiously around the counter, lettered in black: 
ANuBIS Swinoujgcie, trying to keep away from those screws. 
Down the other side he spots a piece of line hanging, and 
manages to get over there and grab hold. The band up on 
deck is playing polkas. Three drunken ladies in tiaras and 
pearl chokers are lounging at the lifelines, watching Slo- 
throp struggle up the rope. “Let’s cut it,” yells one of 
them, “and see him fall in again!” “Yes, let’s!” agree her 
companions. Jesus Christ. One of them has produced a 
huge meat cleaver, and is winding up all right, amid much 
vivacious laughing, at about which point somebody grabs 
hold of Slothrop’s ankle. He looks down, observes sticking 
out a porthole two slender wrists in silver and sapphires, 
lighted from inside like ice, and the oily river rushing by 
underneath. \ ee 

“In here.” A girl’s voice. He slides back down while she 
tugs on his feet, till he’s sitting in the porthole. From 
above comes a heavy thump, the rope goes falling and the 
ladies into hysterics. Slothrop squirms on inside, water 


: In the Zone B37 


squeegeeing off, falls into an upper bunk next to a girl 
maybe 18 in a long sequined gown, with hair blonde to 
the point of pure whiteness, and the first cheekbones Slo- 


_ throp can recall getting a hardon looking at. Something 


has definitely been happening to his brain out here, all 
right.... 

oe (83, ees 

“Mmm.” They look at each other while he continues to 
drip water all over. Her name, it tums out, is Stefania 
Procalowska. Her husband Antoni is owner of the Anubis 
here. 

Well, husband, all right. “Look at this,” sez Slothrop, 
“Tm soaking wet.” 

“T noticed. Somebody’s evening clothes ought to fit you. 
Dry off, Pll go see what I can promote. You can use the 


_ head if you want, everything’s there.” 


He strips off the rest of the Rocketman rig, takes a 
shower, using lemon verbena soap in which he finds a 
couple ‘of Stefania’s white pubic hairs, and is shaving when 
she gets back with dry clothes for him. 

“So you're with Margherita.” 

“Not sure about that ‘with: She find that kid of hers?” 

“Oh indeed—they’re already deep into it with Karel. 
This month he’s posing as a film producer. You know 
Karel. And of course she wants to get Bianca into the 
films worse than anything.” 

= eas 

Stefania shrugs a lot, and every sequin dances. “Mar- 


_ gherita wants her to have a legitimate career. It’s guilt. 


She never felt her own career was anything more than a 
string of dirty movies. I suppose you heard about how she 
got pregnant with Bianca.” 

“Max Schlepzig, or something.” 

“Or something, right. You never saw Alpdriicken? In 
that one scene, after the Grand Inquisitor gets through, 
the jackal men come in to ravish and dismember the 
captive baroness. Von Goll let the cameras run right on. 
The footage got cut out for the release prints of course, 


_ but found its way into Goebbels’s private collection. I’ve 


seen it—it’s frightening. Every man in the scene wears a 


‘black hood, or an animal mask... back at Bydgoszcz it 
; became an amusing party game to speculate on who the 


538 Graviry’s Rainsow 


child’s father was. One has to pass the time. They’d run 
the film and ask Bianca questions, and she had to answer 
yes or no.” 

“Yup.” Slothrop goes on dousing his face with bay rum. 

“Oh, Margherita had her corrupted long before she 
came to stay with us. I wouldn’t be surprised if little 
Bianca sleeps with Karel tonight. Part of breaking into the 
business, isn’t itP Of course it willhave to be all business— 
that’s the least a mother can do, Margherita’s problem was 
that she always enjoyed it too much, chained up in those 
torture rooms. She couldn’t enjoy it any other way. You'll 
see. She and Thanatz. And whatever Thanatz brought in 
his valise.” 

“Thanatz.” 

“Ah, she didn’t tell you.” Laughing. “Miklos Thanatz, 
her husband. They get together off and on. Toward the 
end of the war they had a little touring show for the boys 
at the front—a lesbian couple, a dog, a trunk of leather 
costumes and implements, a small band. They entertained 
the SS troops. Concentration camps... the barbed-wire 
circuit, you know. And then later, in Holland, out at the 
rocket sites. This is the first time since the surrender they’ve 
been together, so I wouldn’t actually expect to see too 
much of her... .” 

“Oh, yeah, well, I didn’t know that.” Rocket sites? The 
hand of Providence creeps among the stars, giving Slothrop 
the finger. 

“While they were away, they left Bianca with us, at 


Bydgoszcz. She has her bitchy moments but she’s really a 


charming child. I never played the father game with her. 
I doubt she had a father. It was parthenogenesis, she’s 
pure Margherita, if pure is the word I want.” 

The evening clothes fit perfectly. Stefania leads Slothrop 
up a companionway and out on deck. The Anubis moves 
now through starlit countryside, the horizon broken now 
and then by silhouettes of a windmill, haycocks, a row of 
pig arks, some line of trees set on a low hill for the 
wind.... There are ships we can dream across terrible 
rapids, against currents...our desire |is wind and 
motor.... i 

“Antoni.” She has brought Slothrop to an enormous 
figure in Polish cavalry fatigues and with a lot of maniacal 
teeth. 


In the Zone 539 


“American?” pumping Slothrop’s hand. “Bravo. You 
nearly complete the set. We are the ship of all nations 
now. We've even got a Japanese on board. An ex-liaison 
man from Berlin who didn’t quite get out by way of 
Russia. Youll find a bar on the next deck. Anything 
wandering around’—hugging Stefania to him—“except 
this one, is fair game.” 

Slothrop salutes, gathers they would like to be alone, 
and finds the ladder to the bar. The bar is hung with 
festive garlands of flowers and light bulbs, and crowded 
with dozens of elegantly-decked guests, who have just 
now, with the band accompanying, broken into this up- 

tempo song: 


WELCOME Axoarp! 


, Welcome aboard, gee, it’s a fabulous. or-gy 
That you just dropped in on, my friend— 
We can’t recall just how it star-ted, 
But there’s only one way it can end! 
The behavior is bestial, hardly Marie-Celestial, 
But you'll fit right in with the crowd, 
If you jettison all of those prob-lems, 
And keep it hysterically loud! 


There are mo-thers, with their lo-vers, 
Stealing rot-ters, from their daught-ers, 
_ Big erec-tions, predilec-tions 
_ That you wouldn’t believe, 
So put your brain on your sleeve, 
And come a- 
board the Titanic, things’ll really be manic, 
| Folks'll panic the second that sunken iceberg is knocked, 
Naughty ’n’ noisy, and very Walpurgisnacht, 
_ That’s how the party will end, 
_ So—welcome aboard, welcome aboard, my friend! 
l 


Well here’s couples moaning together in the lifeboats, a 
_drunk’s gone to sleep in the awning over Slothrop’s head, 
fat fellows in white gloves with pink magnolias in their 
“hair are dancing tummy-to-tummy and murmuring to- 
‘gether in Wendish. Hands grope down inside satin gowns. 

aiters with brown skins and doe eyes circulate with 
trays on which you are likely to find any number of sub- 
oo and paraphernalia. The band is playing a medley 


HFS 


be 

| _ 
hb 

| a 


540 Graviry’s Ratnsow 


of American fox-trots. The Baron de Mallakastra sifts 2 
sinister white powder into the highball of Mme. Sztup. It 
is the same old shit that was going on back at Raoul de la 
Perlimpinpin’s place, and for all Slothrop knows it’s the 
same party. : 

He gets a glimpse of Margherita and her daughter, but 
there is a density of orgy-goers around them that keeps 
him at a distance. He knows he’s vulnerable, more thar 
he should be, to pretty little girls, so he reckons it’s just as 
well, because that Bianca’s a knockout, all right: 11 or 12, 
dark and lovely, wearing a red chiffon gown, silk stock- 
ings and high-heeled slippers, her hair swept up elaborate 
and flawless and interwoven with a string of pearls to 
show pendant earrings of crystal twinkling from her tiny 
lobes... help, help. Why do these things have to keep 
coming down on him? He can see the obit now in Time 
magazine—Died, Rocketman, pushing 30, in the Zone, 
of lust. = 

The woman who tried to chop Slothrop down with the 
cleaver is now seated on a bitt, holding a half-liter of 
some liquid which has already seeped into and begun to 
darken the orchid gamishing it. She is telling everybody a 
story about Margherita. Her hair has been combed or 
styled in a way that makes it look like a certain cut of 
meat. Slothrop’s drink, nominally Irish whisky and water, 
arrives and he moves in to listen. 

“,..her Neptune is afflicted. Whose isn’t? some will 
ask. Ah. But as residents on this planet, usually. Greta 
lived, most of the time, on Neptune—her affliction was 
more direct, purer, clearer than we know it here. 

“She found Oneirine on a day when her outpost in En- 
gland, the usual connection for Chlordyne, failed. Beside 
the Thames, as geraniums of light floated in the sky too 
slow to tell—brass light, tanned-skin and mellow peach 
light, stylized blooms being drafted on and on among the 
clouds, to fade here, to regenerate there—as this happened 
to the day’s light, he fell. A fall of hours, less extravagant 
than Lucifer’s, but in the same way part of a deliberate 
pattern. Greta was meant to find Oneirine. Each plot 
carries its signature. Some are God’s, some masquerade as 
God’s. This is a very advanced kind of forgery. But still 
there’s the same meanness and mortality to it as a bes | 


| | 


In the Zone 541 


made check. It is only more complex. The members have 
names, like the Archangels. More or less common, humanly- 
given names whose security can be broken, and the names 
learned. But those names are not magic. That’s the key, 
that’s the difference. Spoken aloud, even with the purest 

magical intention, they do not work. 

_ “So he fell from their grace. So there was no Chlordyne. 
So she happened to meet V-Mann Wimpe in the street, in 
Berlin, under a theatre marquee whose sentient bulbs may 
have looked on, a picturesque array of extras, witnesses to 
grave and historic encounters. So she had come to Onei- 
rine, and the face of her afflicted home planet was re- 
arranged in the instant.” 

Oneirine Jamf Imipolex A4.... 

“That silly bitch,” observes a voice at Slothrop’s elbow, 

. “tells it worse every time.” 

“Beg pardon?” Slothrop looks around and finds Miklos 

‘Thanatz, full beard, eyebrows feathering out like trailing 
edges of hawks’ wings, drinking absinthe out of a souvenir 
stein on which, in colors made ghastly by the carnival 
lights on deck, bony and giggling Death is about to sur- 
prise two lovers in bed. 

There is no problem steering him onto the subject of the 
Rocket—“T think of the A4;” sez he, “as a baby Jesus, with 
endless committees of Herods out to destroy it in infancy— 
Prussians, some of whom in their innermost hearts still 

felt artillery to be a dangerous innovation. If you’d been 

,out there .’.. inside the first minute, you saw, you grew 
docile under its...it really did possess a Max Weber 
charisma .. . some joyful—and deeply irrational—force the 
‘State bureaucracy could never routinize, against which it 
could not prevail...they did resist it, but they also 
allowed it to happen. We can’t imagine anyone choosing 
a role like that. But every year, somehow, their numbers 
grow.” 

But the tour with General Kammler’s rocketeers is what 
Slothrop, perversely, wants—wants?—to know about, 
“Well I’ve been to that Nordhausen, sure, seen the bits and 
pieces. But never a fully-assembled A4. That must really 
be something, huh?” 

_ Thanatz is holding out his stein for a refill. The waiter, 

dpan, dribbles water down a spoon to turn the absinthe 


) 


veh 
bod 


oe 
r 


“ 


542 Gravity's Rainsow 


milky green while Thanatz caresses his buttocks, then 
moves away. It is not clear if Thanatz has been thinking 
about his answer. “Yes, fueled, alive, ready for firing... 
fifty feet high, trembling... and then the fantastic, virile 
roar. Your ears nearly burst. Cruel, hard, thrusting into the 
virgin-blue robes of the sky, my friend. Oh, so phailic, 
Wouldn’t you say?” 

TU 

“Hmm, ja, you would have got on with them out at the 
batteries, they were sedate, like you. More studious than 
your infantry or Panzer types, attentive to the point of 
fanaticism. Oh, with notable exceptions of course. One 
lives for notable exceptions. ... There was a boy.” Drunk 
reminiscence? Is he faking this? “His name was Gottfried. 
God’s peace, which I trust he’s found. For us I hold no 
such hope. We are weighed in the balance and found want- 
ing, and the Butcher has had His thumb in the scales... 
you think I’m jaded. So did I, until that terrible week. It 
was a time of dissolution, falling back across the Nieder- 
sichsisch oil fields. Then I understood I was but a dewy 
child. The battery commander had become a screaming 
maniac. He called himself ‘Blicero.’ He’d begun to talk the 
way the captain in Wozzeck sings, his voice breaking sud- 
denly up into the higher registers of hysteria. Things were 
falling apart, and he reverted to some ancestral version of 
himself, screamed at the sky, sat hours in a rigid trance, 
with his eyes rolled clear up into his head. Breaking with- 
out warning into that ungodly coloratura. White blank 
ovals, the eyes of a statue, with the gray rain behind them. 
He had left 1945, wired his nerves back into the pre- 
Christian earth we fled across, into the Urstoff of the 
primitive German, God’s poorest and most panicked crea- 
ture. You and I perhaps have become over the generations 
so Christianized, so enfeebled by Gesellschaft and our 
obligation to its celebrated ‘Contract,’ which never did 
exist, that we, even we, are appalled by reversions like 
that. But deep, out of its silence, the Urstoff wakes, and 
sings... and on the last day... it is shameful . . . through 
that whole terrible day, I had an erection... don’t judge 
me... it was out of my control... everything was out of 
control—” ff 

About here they are interrupted by Margherita and 


In the Zone 543 


Bianca, playing stage mother and reluctant child. Whis- 
pers to the bandleader, funseekers crowding eagerly around 
a cleared space where Bianca now stands pouting, her 
little red frock halfway up her slender thighs, with black 
lace petticoats peeping from beneath the hem, surely it’s 
going to be something sophisticated, bigcity, and wicked, 
but what’s she doing with her finger posed aside of one 
dimpled cheek like this—at which point comes the band’s 
intro, and pre-vomit saliva begins to gush into Slothrop’s 
mouth, along with a horrible doubt into his brain about 
how he is going to make it through the next few minutes. 
Not only is her song “On the Good Ship Lollipop,” but 
she is also now commencing, without a trace of shame, to 
‘grunt her way through it, in perfect mimickry of young 
Shirley Temple—each straining baby-pig inflection, each 
curl-toss, unmotivated smile, and stumbling toe-tap... her 
delicate bare arms have begun to grow fatter, her frock 
shorter—is somebody fooling with the lightsP But the 
billowings of asexual child-fat have not changed her eyes: 
they remain as they were, mocking, dark, her own.... 

Much applause and alcoholic bravo-ing when it’s finally 
over. Thanatz abstains, fatherly head wagging, great eye- 
brows in a frown. “She’s never going to be a woman if 
this goes on... .” 

“And now, liebling,’ Margherita with a rare, and some- 
what phony, smile, “let’s hear ‘Animal Crackers in My 
Soup 

“‘Super Animals in My Crack,” hollers a humorist 
from the crowd. — 

“No,” groans the child. 

“Bianca—” 

“You bitch,” spike heel ringing on the steel deck. It’s an 
act. “Haven’t you humiliated me enough?” 

“Not nearly enough,” pouncing on her daughter, grabbing 
her by the hair and shaking her. The little girl has fallen 
to her knees, struggling; trying to get away. 

“Oh, delightful,” cries the meat-cleaver lady, “Greta’s 
going to punish her.” 

“How Id like to,” murmurs a striking mulatto girl in a 
strapless gown, pushing forward to watch, tapping Slo- 
throp’s cheek with her jeweled cigarette holder as satin 
haunches whisper across his thigh. Someone has provided 


} 


544 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


Margherita with a steel ruler and an ebony Empire chair. 
She drags Bianca across her lap, pushing up frock and 
petticoats, yanking down white lace knickers. Beautiful 
little-girl buttocks rise like moons. The tender crevice 
tightens and relaxes, suspender straps shift and stretch as 
Bianca kicks her legs, silk stockings squeak together, erotic 
and audible now that the group have fallen silent and 
found the medium of touch, hands reaching out to breasts 
and crotches, Adam’s apples bobbing, tongues licking lips 
.-,Where’s the old masochist and monument Slothrop 
knew back in Berlin? It’s as if Greta is now releasing all 
the pain she’s stored up over the past weeks onto her 
child’s naked bottom, the skin so finely grained that white 
centimeter markings and numerals are being left in mirror- 
image against the red stripes with each blow, crisscrossing, 
building up a skew matrix of pain on Bianca’s flesh. Tears 
go streaming down her inverted and reddening face, mix- 
ing with mascara, dripping onto the pale lizard surfaces of 
her mother’s shoes... her hair has loosened and spills to 
the deck, dark, salted with the string of little seed pearls. 
The mulatto girl has backed up against Slothrop, reaching 
behind to fondle his erection, which has nothing between 
it and the outside but somebody’s loosely-pleated tuxedo 
trousers. Everyone is kind of aroused, Thanatz is sitting 
up on the bar having his own as yet unsheathed penis 
mouthed by one of the white-gloved Wends. Two of the 
waiters kneel on deck lapping at the juicy genitals of a 
blonde in a wine velvet frock, who meantime is licking 
ardently the tall and shiny French heels of an elderly lady 
in lemon organza busy fastening felt-lined silver manacles 
to the wrists of her escort, a major of the Yugoslay artillery 
in dress uniform, who kneels with nose and tongue well 
between the bruised buttocks of a long-legged ballerina 
from Paris, holding up her silk skirt for him with docile 
fingertips while her companion, a tall Swiss divoreée in 
tight-laced leather corselette and black Russian boots, un- 
does the top of her friend’s gown and skillfully begins to | 
lash at her bared breasts with the stems! of half a dozen 

roses, red as the beads of blood which spring up and soon > 
are shaking off the ends of her stiff nipples to splash into : 
the eager mouth of another Wend who’s being jerked off | 
by a retired Dutch banker sitting on the deck, shoes and | 


: 


In the Zone 545 


socks just removed by two adorable schoolgirls, twin 
sisters in fact, in identical dress of flowered voile, with 
each of the banker’s big toes inserted now into a downy 
little furrow as they lie forward along his legs kissing his 
shaggy stomach, pretty twin bottoms arched to receive in 
their anal openings the cocks of the two waiters who have 
but lately been, if you recall, eating that juicy blonde in 
that velvet dress back down the Oder River a ways.... 

As for Slothrop, he ends up coming between the round 
shuddering tits of a Viennese girl with hair the color of a 
lioness’s pelt and emerald eyes with lashes thick as fur, his 
sperm surging out into the hollow of her arched throat 
and among all the diamonds of her necklace, burning age- 
Jessly through the haze of his seed—and it feels, at least, 
like everybody came together, though how could that be? 
He does notice that the only person not connected, aside 
from Antoni and Stefania, seems to be the Jap liaison man, 
who’s been sitting alone, one deck up, watching. Not 
masturbating or anything, just watching, watching the 
river, the night... well, theyre pretty inscrutable, you 
know, those Japs. 

There is a general withdrawing from orifices after a 
while, drinking, doping and gabbing resume, and many 
begin to drift away to catch some sleep. Here and there 
a couple or threesome linger. A C-melody saxophone 
player has the bell of his instrument snuggled between the 
widespread thighs of a pretty matron in sunglasses, yes 
sunglasses at night, this is some degenerate company Slo- 
throp has fallen in with all right—the saxman is playing 
“Chattanooga Choo Choo,” and those vibrations are just 
driving her wild. A girl with an enormous glass dildo in- 
side which baby piranhas are swimming in some kind 
of decadent lavender medium amuses herself between 
the buttocks of a stout transvestite in lace stockings and a 
dyed sable coat. A Montenegran countess is being fucked 
simultaneously in her chignon and her navel by a pair of 
octogenarians who wear only jackboots and are carrying 
on some sort of technical discussion in what seems to be 
ecclesiastical Latin. 

The sun is still hours away, down the vast unreadable 
underslope of Russia. Fog closes in, and the engines slow. 
Wiecks slide away under the keel of the white ship. 


546 Gravity's Rainsow 


Springtime corpses caught in the wreckage twist and flov 
as the Anubis moves by overhead, Under the bowsprit, the 
golden jackal, the only being aboard that can see througl 
the fog, stares ahead, down the river, toward Swine 
moiinde, 


O 


Slothrop here’s been dreaming about Llandudno, where 
he spent a rainy furlough once drinking bitter in bec 
with a tug skipper’s daughter. Also where Lewis Carrol 
wrote that Alice in Wonderland. So, they put up a statue 
of the White Rabbit in Llandudno. White Rabbit’s beer 
talking to Slothrop, serious and crucial talk, but on the 
way up to waking he loses it all, as usual. He lies staring 
at ducts and raceways overhead, asbestos-covered elbows 
pipes, gages, tanks, switchboards, flanges, unions, valve 
wheels and all their thickets of shadow. It’s noisy as hell 
Sunlight filters down the hatches, so that must mean it’s 
morning. In a corner of his vision now, he catches a fluttes 
of red, 

“You mustn’t tell Margherita, Please.” That Bisse Hai 
down to her hips, cheeks smudged, eyes hot. “She'll kill 
me,” 

“What time is it?” 

“The sun’s been up for hours, Why do you want to 
know?” 

Why does he want to know. Hmm. Maybe he'll go back 
to sleep, here. “Your mother upset with you, or some- 
thing?” 

“Oh, she’s gone out of her mind, she just accused me 
of having an affair with Thanatz. Madness, of course we're 
good friends, but that’s all... if she paid any attention be 
me she’d know that,” 

“She sure was paying attention to your ass there, kid.” 

“Oh, dear,” lifting her dress, turning so she can also 
watch ’Slothrop back over a shoulder. “I can still feel that. 
Did she leave marks?” ; can 

“Well, you'll have to come closer.” 

She moyes toward him, smiling, pointing toes ree 

“I watched you sleep. You're very pretty, you 
Mother also said you’re cruel.” 


| 
| 
| In the Zone 547 
al j 
! _ “Watch this.” He leans to bite her gently on one cheek 
| of her ass. She squirms, but doesn’t move away. 
| “Mm. There’s a zipper there, could you...” She shrugs, 
|. twists as he unzips her, red.taffeta slides down and off and 
sure enough there’s one or two lavender bruises starting to | 
show up on her bottom, which is perfectly shaped, smooth 
|. as cream. Small as she is, she’s been further laced into a 
_ tiny black corset, which compresses her waist now to the 
diameter of a brandy bottle and pushes pre-subdeb breasts 
up into little white crescents, Satin straps, adorned with 
_ intricately pornographic needlework, run down each thigh 
| to hold up stockings with tops of dark Alencon lace. The 
bare backs of her legs come brushing softly across Slo- 
| throp’s face. He starts taking giant, ass-enthusiast bites 
_ Now, meantime reaching around to play with cuntlips and 
» clit,. Bianca’s little feet shifting in a nervous dance and 
_ scarlet nails digging sharp as needles underneath her 
_ stocking tops and into her legs as he goes planting hickeys, 
_ red nebulae across her sensitive spaces. She smells like 
_ soap, flowers, sweat, cunt. Her long hair falls to the level 
_ of Slothrop’s eyes, fine and black, the split ends whisper- 
_ ing across the small of her white back in and out of in- 
_ visibility, like rain...she has turned, and sinks to her 
__ knees to undo his pleated trousers. Leaning, brushing hair 
| back behind her ears, the little girl takes the head of Slo- 
__throp’s cock into her rouged mouth. Her eyes glitter 
' through fer lashes, baby rodent hands race his body 
|| unbuttoning, caressing. Such a slender child: her throat 
swallowing, strummed to a moan as he grabs her hair, 
| twists it ... she has him all figured out. Knows exactly when 
_ to take her mouth away and stand up, high-heeled Parisian 
| slippers planted to either side of him, swaying, hair softly 
| waving forward to frame her face, repeated by the corset 
| darkly framing her pubic mound and belly. Raising bare 
| 
| 


arms, little Bianca lifts her long hair, tosses her little head 
to let the mane shiver down her back, needle-tipped fin- 
. Bers drifting then down slowly, making him wait, down 
over the satin, all the shiny hooks and laces, to her thighs. 
Then her face, round with baby-fat, enormous night- 
shadowed eyes comes swooping in as she kneels, guides his 
| Penis into her and settles slow, excruciating till he fills 
her, stuffs her full.... 
i Now something, oh, kind of funny happens here. Not 
of 


4 
a 
i 


548 Gravity’s Rarnsow 


that Slothrop is really aware of it now, while it’s going 
on—but later on, it will occur to him that he was—this 
may sound odd, but he was somehow, actually, well, in- 
side his own cock. If you can imagine such a thing. Yes, 
inside the metropolitan organ entirely, all other colonial 
tissue forgotten and left to fend for itself, his arms and 
legs it seems woven among vessels and ducts, his sperm 
roaring louder and louder, getting ready to erupt, some- 
where below his feet... maroon and evening cuntlight 
reaches him in a single ray through the opening at the 
top, refracted through the clear juices flowing up around 
him. He is enclosed. Everything is about to come, come 
incredibly, and he’s helpless here in this exploding em- 
prise...red flesh echoing...an extraordinary sense of 
waiting to risé.... 

She .posts, his pretty horsewoman, face to the overhead, 
quivering up and down, thightop muscles strung hard as 
cable, baby breasts working out the top of her garment 
...Slothrop pulls Bianca to him by her nipples and bites 
each one very hard. Sliding her arms around his neck, 
hugging him, she starts to come, and so does he, their 
own flood taking him up then out of his expectancy, ‘out 
the eye at tower’s summit and into her with a singular 
detonation of touch. Announcing the void, what could it 
be but the kingly voice of the Aggregat itself? 

Somewhere in their lying-still are her heart, buffeting, a 
chickadee in the snow, her hair, draping and sheltering 
both their faces, little tongue at his temples and eyes on 
and on, silk legs rubbing his flanks, cool leather of her 
shoes against his legs and ankles, shoulderblades rising like 
wings whenever she hugs him. What happened back there? 
Slothrop thinks he might cry. 

They have been holding each other. She’s been talking 
about hiding out. 

“Sure. But we'll have to get off sometime, Swinemiinde, 
someplace.” | 


“No. We can get away. I’m a child, I know how to hide. — 


I can hide you too.” 


He knows she can. He knows. Right ie right now, — 


under the make-up and the fancy underwear, she exists, 
love, invisibility... For Slothrop this is some discovery. 


But her arms about his neck are shifting now, apprehen- : 


paculn the Zone 549 


sive. For good reason. Sure he'll stay for a while, but 
eventually he'll go, and for this he is to be counted, after 
all, among the Zone’s lost. The Pope’s staff is always going 
to remain barren, like Slothrop’s own unflowering cock. 

So when he disentangles himself, it is extravagantly. He 
creates a bureaucracy of departure, inoculations against 
forgetting, exit visas stamped with love-bites... but 
coming back is something he’s already forgotten about. 
Straightening his bow tie, brushing off the satin lapels of 
his jacket, buttoning up his pants, back in uniform of the 
day, he turns his back on her, and up the ladder he goes. 
The last instant their eyes were in touch is already behind 
him 


Alone, kneeling on the painted steel, like her mother 
she knows how horror will come when the afternoon is 
brightest. And like Margherita, she has her worst visions 
in black and white. Each day she feels closer to the edge 
of something. She dreams often of the same journey: a 
passage by train, between two well-known cities, hit by 
that same nacreous wrinkling the films use to suggest rain 
out a window. In a Pullman, dictating her story. She feels 
able at last to tell of a personal horror, tell it clearly in a 
way others can share. That may keep it from taking her 
past the edge, into silver-salt dark closing ponderably slow 
at her mind’s flank ... when she was growing out her fringes, 
in dark rooms her own unaccustomed hair, beside her 
eyes, would loom like a presence. ... In her ruined towers 
now the bells gong back and forth in the wind. Frayed ropes 
dangle or slap where her brown hoods no longer glide 
above the stone. Her wind keeps even dust away. It is old 
daylight: late, and cold. Horror in the brightest hour of 
afternoon . . . sails on the sea too small and distant to mat- 
ter... water too steel and cold.... 

Her look now—this deepening arrest—has already 
broken Slothrop’s seeing heart: has broken and broken, 
that same look swung as he drove by, thrust away into 
twilights of moss and crumbling colony, of skinny clouded- 
cylinder gas pumps, of tin Moxie signs gentian and bitter- 
Sweet as the taste they were there to hustle on the weath- 
ered sides of barns, looked for how many Last Times up in 
the rearview mirror, all of them too far inside metal and 
combustion, allowing the days’ targets more reality than 


7 


550 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


anything that might come up by surprise, by Murphy’s 
Law, where the salvation could be.... Lost, again and 
again, past poor dam-busted and drowned Becket, up and | 
down the rut-brown slopes, the hayrakes rusting in the | 
afternoon, the sky purple-gray, dark as chewed gum, the | 
mist starting to make white dashes in the air, aimed earth- | 
ward a quarter, a half inch... she looked at him once, of | 
course he still remembers, from down at the end of a 
lunchwagon counter, grill smoke working onto the win- | 
dows patient as shoe grease against the rain for the plaid, | 
hunched-up leaky handful inside, off the jukebox a quick | 
twinkle in the bleat of a trombone, a reed section, planting 
swing notes precisely into the groove between silent mid- | 
point and next beat, jumping it pah (hm) pah (hm) pah| 
so exactly in the groove that you knew it was ahead but} 
felt it was behind, both of you, at both ends of the counter, | 
could feel it, feel your age delivered into a new kind of | 
time that may have allowed you to miss the rest, the} 
graceless expectations of old men who watched, in bifocal | 
and mucus indifference, watched you lindy-hop into the) 
pit by millions, as many millions as necessary. . . . Of course 
Slothrop lost her, and kept losing her—it was an American | 
requirement—out the windows of the Greyhound, passing | 
into beveled stonery, green and elm-folded on into a fail-| 
ure of perception, or, in a more sinister sense, of will (you| 
used to know what these words mean), she has moved on, | 
untroubled, too much Theirs, no chance of a beige sum- | 
mer spook at her roadside. . 
Leaving Slothrop in his cityareflexes and Harvard crew | 
sox—both happening to be red-ring manacles, comicbook | 
irons (though the comic book was virtually uncirculated, 
found by chance near nightfall by a hopper at a Berk-|’ 
shire sandbank. The name of the -hero—or being—was) 
Sundial. The frames never enclosed him—or it—for long 
enough to tell. Sundial, flashing in, flashing out again, | 
came from “across the wind,” by which readers under. 
stood “across some flow, more or less sheet and vertical: | 
a wall in constant motion”—over there was a different” 
world, where Sundial took care of business they would 
never understand). 1 
Distant, yes these are pretty distant Sure they are. Toc » 
much closer and it begins ‘to hurt to bring her back. But) 


there is this Eurydice-obsession, this bringing back on 


oh 
In the Zone 551 


of...though how much easier just to leave her there, in 
fetid carbide and dead-canary soups of breath and come 
‘out and have comfort enough to try only for a reasonable 
fascimile—“Why bring her back? Why try? It’s only the 
difference between the real boxtop and the one you draw 
‘for Them.” No. How can he believe that? It’s what They 
want him to believe, but how can heP No difference be- 
‘tween a boxtop and its image, all right, their whole econ- 
‘omy’s based on that... but she must be more than an ~ 
‘image, a product, a promise to pay.... 

~/ Of all her putative fathers—Max Schlepzig and masked 
extras on one side of the moving film, Franz Pékler and 
certainly other pairs of hands busy through trouser cloth, 
that Alpdriicken Night, on the other—Bianca is closest, 
this last possible moment below decks here behind 
the ravening jackal, closest to you who came in blinding 
color, slouched alone in your own seat, never threatened 
along any rookwise row or diagonal all night, you whose 
interdiction from her mother’s water-white love is abso- 
lute, you, alone, saying sure I know them, omiited, chuck- 
ling: count me in, unable, thinking probably some: hooker 
_...She favors you, most of all, You'll never get to see her. 


So somebody has to tell you. 


Oo 


Halfway up the ladder, Slothrop is startled by a bright 

‘set of teeth, beaming out of a dark hatchway. “I was 

‘watching. I hope you don’t mind.” Seems to be that Nip 

‘again, who introduces himself now as Ensign Morituri, of 

the Imperial Japanese Navy. 

_ “Yeah, I...” why is Slothrop drawling this way? “saw 

ya watching .. . last night too, mister. . ..” 

_ “You think I am a voyeur. Yes you do. But it isn’t that. 

There is no thrill, I mean, But when I watch people, I feel 

Tess alone.” 

_“W'1 hell, Ensign... why don’tcha just...join in? 

They're always lookin’ fer . .. company.” 

- “Oh, my goodness,” grinning one of them big poly- 

hedral Jap grins, like they do, “then I would feel more 
e. 

) Tables and chairs have been set out under orange-and- 


552. Gravity's Rarmnsow 


red-stripe awnings on the fantail, Slothrop and Morituri 
have got the place almost to themselves, except for some 
girls in two-piece swimsuits out to catch some sun before 
it goes away. Cumulonimbus are building up dead ahead. 
You can hear thunder in the distance. The air is coming 
awake. 

A steward brings coffee, cream, porridge and fresh 
oranges. Slothrop looks at the porridge, doubtful. “I'll take 
’ it,” Ensign Morituri grabbing the bowl. 

“Oh, sure.” Slothrop notices now how this Nip also has 
this wide handle-bar mustache. “Aha, aha. ’m hep to you. 
A porridge fan! Shameful. A latent Anglophile—yeah, 
youre blushing.” Pointing and hollering ha, ha, ha.- 

“You've found me-out. Yes, yes. I’ve been on the wrong 
side for six years.” 

“Ever try to get away?” 

“And find out what you people are really like? Oh, my 
golly. What if phile changes then to phobe? Where would 
I be?” He giggles, spits an orange pit over the side. Seems 
he put in a. few weeks’ training on that Formosa, in 
Kamikaze school, but they washed him out. No one ever 
told him why, exactly. Something to do with his attitude. 
“I just didn’t have a good attitude,” he sighs. “So they 
sent me back here again, by way of Russia and Switzer- 
land. This time with the Propaganda Ministry.” He would 
sit most of the day watching Allied footage for what could 
be pulled and worked into newsreels to make the Axis look 
good and the other side look bad. “All I know about Great 
Britain comes from that raw material.” 

“Looks like German movies have warped other outlooks 
around here too.” iB 

“You mean Margherita’s. Did you know, that’s how we 
met! A mutual friend at Ufa. I was on holiday at Bad 
Karma—just before the Polish invasion. The little town 
where you joined us. It was a spa. I watched you fall in 
the water. Then you climbed aboard. I: also watched Mar- 
gherita watching you. Please don’t be offended, ‘Slothrop, 
but it might be better to stay away anit her right now. 

“Not at all. I know something creepy/is going on.” He 
tells Morituri about the incident in the Sprudelhof, and 
Margherita’s flight from the apparition in black. lisa 

The Ensign nods, grim, twisting half his mustache up: 


In the Zone 553 


so it points in a saber at one eye. “She didn’t tell you 
what happened there? Golly, Jack, you had better 
know. ...” 


Ensicn Morirunri’s Story 


Wars have a way of overriding the days just before 
them. In the looking back, there is such noise and gravity. 
But we are conditioned to forget. So that the war may 
have more importance, yes, but still...isn’t the hidden 
machinery easier to see in the days leading up to the 
event? There are arrangements, things to be expedited... 
and often the edges are apt to lift, briefly, and we see 
things we were not meant to.... 

They'd tried to talk Margherita out of going to Holly- 
wood: She went, and she failed. Rollo was there when 
she returned, to keep the worst from happening. For a 
month he impounded sharp objects, kept her at ground 
level and away from chemicals, which meant she didn’t 
sleep much. She would drop off and wake up hysterical. 
Afraid to go to sleep. Afraid she wouldn’t know how to 
get back. 

Rollo did not have a keen mind. He meant well, but 
after a month of her he found he couldn’t take any more. 
Actually it surprised everyone that he’d lasted so long. 
Greta was handed over to Sigmund, hardly improved, but 
perhaps no worse. ae. 
| The trouble with Sigmund was the place he happened 
to be living in, a drafty, crenelated deformity overlooking 
a cold little lake in the Bavarian Alps. Parts of it must 
have dated back to the fall of Rome. That was where 
Sigmund brought her. 

She had got the idea somewhere that she was part 
Jewish. Things in Germany by then, as everyone knows, 
were very bad. Margherita was terrified of being “found 
out.” She heard Gestapo in every puff of air that slipped 
in, among any of a thousand windways of dilapidation. 
Sigmund spent whole nights trying to talk it away. He 
was no better at it than Rollo. It was around this time 
that her symptoms began. 

However psychogenic these pains, tics, hives and 
nauseas, her suffering was real. Acupuncturists came down 


if 


“Sy 


554 Gravity's Rainsow 


by Zeppelin from Berlin, showing up in the middle of the 
night with little velvet cases full of gold needles. Viennese 
analysts, Indian holy men, Baptists from America troopec 
in and out of Sigmund’s castle, stage-hypnotists and Co. 
lombian curanderos slept on the rug in front of the fire 
place. Nothing worked. Sigmund: grew alarmed, and be- 
fore long as ready as Margherita to hallucinate. Probably 
it was she who suggested Bad Karma. It had a reputatior 
that summer for its mud, hot and greasy mud with traces 
of radium, jet black, softly bubbling. Ah. Anyone who’s 
been sick in that way can imagine her hope. That muc 
would cure anything. 

Where was anybody that summer before the War? 
Dreaming. The spas that summer, the summer Ensign 
Morituri came to Bad Karma, were crowded with sleep- 
walkers. Nothing for him to do at the Embassy. They 
suggested a holiday till September. He should have known 
something was up, but he only went on holiday to Bad 
Karma—spent the days drinking Pilsener Urquelle in the 
café by the lake in the Pavilion Park. He was a stranger, 
half the time drunk, silly beer-drunk, and he hardly spoke 
their language. But what he saw must have been going on 
all over Germany. A premeditated frenzy.’ Le 

Margherita and Sigmund moved along the same mag- 
nolia-shaded paths, sat out in rolling-chairs to hear con- 
certs of patriotic music... when it rained they fidgeted 
over card games in one of the public rooms of their Kur- 
haus. At night they watched the fireworks—fountains, 
spark-foaming rockets, yellow starbursts high over Poland. 
That oneiric season. . . . There was no one in all the spas 
to read anything in the patterns the fires made. They 
were only gay lights, nervous as the fantasies that flickered 
from eye to eye, trailing the skin like the ostrich fans of 
50 years ago. i 

When did Sigmund first notice her absences, or when 
did they become for him more than routine? Always she 
gave him plausible stories: a medical appointment, a chance 
meeting with an old friend, drowsiness in the mud-baths, 
while time raced by. It may have been unaccustomed sleep 
that got him suspicious at last, because of what her wake- 
fulness had put him through in the South. The stories about. 
the children in the local newspapers could have made no 


. In the Zone 555 


impression, not then, Sigmund only read headlines, and 


- rarely at that, to fill up a dead moment. 


Morituri saw them often. They would meet and bow, 
exchange Heil Hitlers, and the Ensign would be permitted 
a few minutes to practice his German. Except for waiters 
and barmen, they were the only people he spoke with. 
Out at the tennis courts, waiting in line at the pump room 
under the cool colonnade, at an aquatic corso, a battle of 
flowers, a Venetian féte, Sigmund and Margherita hardly 
changed, he with his—Morituri thought of it as his Ameri- 
can Smile, around the amber ‘stem of his dead pipe. . . his 
head like a flesh Christmas ornament... how long ago it 
was...sShe with her yellow sunglasses and Garbo hats. 


The flowers were all that changed about her day to day: 
' morning glory, almond blossom, foxglove. Morituri grew 


to look forward so to these daily meetings. His wife and 
daughters clear on the other side of the world, himself 
exiled in a country that bewildered and oppressed him. He 
needed the passing zoogoers’ civility, the guidebook words. 
He knows he stared back, every bit as curious. In their 
European slickness, they all fascinated him: the white- 
plumed old ladies in the lying-out chairs, the veterans of 
the Great War-like serene hippopotamuses soaking in the 
steel baths, their effeminate secretaries chattering shrill as 
monkeys across the Sprudelstrasse, while far down the 
arches of lindens and chestnuts you could hear the endless 


_ Toar of carbon dioxide at the bubbling spring, coming out 


of solution in great shuddering spheres... but Sigmund 
and Margherita fascinated him most of all. “They seemed 
as alien here as I was. We each have antennas, don’t we, 


_ tuned to recognize our own... .” 


One forenoon, by accident, he met Sigmund, alone, a 
tweed statue on his walking stick in front of the Inhala- 
torium, looking as if he’d lost his way, no real place to go, 
no desire. Without premeditation, then, they began to 
talk. The time was right. They moved off presently, stroll- 
ing through the crowds of sick foreigners, while Sigmund 
told of his troubles with Greta, her Jewish fantasy, her 
absences. The day before, he had caught her out in a lie. 


_ She’d come in very late. Her hands had taken a fine tremor 


that wouldn’t stop. He’d begun to notice things. Her 


shoes, beaded with drying black mud. A seam in her dress 


556 Gravity’s Rainsow 


widened, nearly ripped, though she’d been losing weight. 
But he hadn’t the courage to have it out with her. 
Morituri, who had been reading the papers, for whom 
the connection had sprung up like a monster from the 
tamed effervescences of the Trinkhalle, but who did not 
have the words, German or otherwise, to tell Sigmund, 
Morituri, the Beer Ensign, began to follow her then. She 
never looked back, but she knew he was there. At the 
weekly ball in the Kursaal he felt, for the first time, a 
reticence among them all. Margherita, eyes ke was ac- 
customed to seeing covered with sunglasses naked now, 
burning terribly, never took her gaze from him; The Kur- 
Orchestra played selections from The Merry Widow and 
Secrets of Suzanne, out-of-date music, and yet, when bits 
of it found Morituri years later in the street, over the 
radio, they never failed to bring back the unwritten taste 
of that night, the three of them at the edge of a deepness 
none could sound...some last reprise of the European 
thirties he had never known... which are also for him a 
particular room, a salon in the afternoon: lean girls in 
gowns, mascara all around their eyes, the men with faces 
shaven very smooth, film-star polished .. . not operetta but 
dance music here, sophisticated, soothing, a bit “modem,” 
dipping elegantly in the up-to-date melodic lines... an 
upstairs room, with late sunlight coming in, deep carpets, 
voices saying nothing heavy or complex, smiles informed 
and condescending. He was awakened that morning in a 
soft bed, he looks forward to an evening at a cabaret 
dancing to popular love songs played in just such a man- 
nered and polished style. His afternoon salon with its held 
tears, its smoke, its careful passion has been a way-station 
between the comfortable morning and the comfortable 
night: it was Europe, it was the smoky, citied fear of 
death, and most perilous it was Margherita’s scrutable 
eyes, that lost encounter in the Kursaal, black eyes among 
those huddled jewels and nodding old generals, in the 
roar from the Brodelbrunnen outside, filing the quiet 
spaces in the music as machinery was soon ‘to fill the sky. 
Next evening, Morituri followed her out for the last time. 
Down the worn paths, under the accustomed trees, past 
the German goldfish pool that reminded him of home, 
across the golf links, the day’s last white-mustached men 


In the Zone 557 


struggling up out of traps and hazards, their caddies stand- 
ing at allegorical attention in the glow of the sunset, the 
bundled clubs.in Fascist silhouette.... Twilight came 
down on Bad Karma that night pallid and violent: the 
horizon was_a Biblical disaster. Greta had dressed all in 
black, a hat with a veil covering most of her hair, purse 
slung by a long strap over one shoulder. As choices of a 
destination narrowed to one, as Morituri ran into snares the 
night began to lay out for him, prophecy filled him like 
the river wind: where she had been on her absences, how 
the children in those headlines had— 

They had arrived at the edge of the black mud pool: 
that underground presence, old as Earth, partly enclosed 

- back at the Spa and a name given to. ... The offering was 
to be.a boy, lingering after all the others had gone. His 
hair was cold snow. Morituri could only hear fragments of 
what they said. The boy wasn’t afraid of her at first. He 
might not have recognized her from his dreams. It would 
have been his only hope. But they had made that im- 
possible, his German overseers. Morituri stood by in his 
uniform, waiting, unbuttoning the jacket so that he could 
move, though he didn’t want to. Certainly they were all 
repeating this broken act from an earlier time.... 

Her voice began its rise, and the boy his trembling. 
“You have been in exile too long.” It was a loud clap in 
the dusk. “Come home, with me,” she cried, “back to your 
people.” Now he was trying to break away, but her hand, 
her gloved hand, her claw had flown out and seized his 
arm. “Little piece of Jewish shit. Don’t try to run away 
from me.” 

. “No...”: but at re very end rising, in a provocative 
| question. 

“You know Enh I am, too. My home is the form of 
Light,” burlesquing it now, in heavy Yiddish dialect, 
actressy and false, “I wander all the Diaspora looking for 
strayed children. I am Israel. I am the Shekhinah, queen, 
daughter, bride, and mother of God. And I will take you 
back, you fragment of smashed vessel, even if I must pull 

_ you by your nasty little circumcised penis—” 
eNO... 


_ So Ensign Morituri, committed then the only known 
act of heroism in his career. It’s not even in his folder. 
>) 
B 
Z 


a 


558 Gravity’s RaInsow 


She had gathered the boy struggling, one glove busy be- 
tween his legs. Morituri rushed forward. For a moment 
the three of them swayed, locked together. Gray Nazi 
statuary: its name may have been “The Family.” None of 
the Greek stillness: no, they moved. Immortality was not 
the issue. That’s what made them different. No survival, 
beyond the senses’ taking of it—no handing-down. 
Doomed as d’Annunzio’s adventure at Fiume, as the Reich 
itself, as the poor creatures from whom the boy now tore 
loose and ran off into the evening. 

Margherita collapsed by the edge of the great lightless 
pool, Morituri knelt beside her while she cried. It was 
terrible. What had brought him there, what had under- 
stood and moved in so automatically, fell back now to 
sleep. His conditioning, his verbal, ranked and uniformed 
self took over again. He knelt shivering, more afraid than 
he’d ever been in his life. It was she who led their way 
back to the Spa. 

She and Sigmund left Bad Karma that night. The boy 
may have been too frightened, the light too faint, Mori- 
turi himself may have had strong protectors, for God 
knows he was visible enough there—but no police came. 
“It never occurred to me to go to them. In my heart, I 
knew she had murdered. You may condemn me for it. But 
I saw what I'd be handing her over to, and it came to 
the same thing, in official custody or not, you see.” The 
next day was 1 September. There was no longer any way 
for children to vanish mysteriously. 


The forenoon has gone dark. Rain spits in under the 
awning. The bowl of porridge has stayed all untouched 
in front of Morituri.. Slothrop is sweating, staring at the 
bright remains of an orange. “Listen,” it has occurred to 
his agile brain, “what about Bianca, then? Is she going 
to be safe with that Greta, do you think?” 

Frisking his great mustache, “What do you mean? Are 
you asking, ‘Can she be saved?”” mn 

“Oh, pip, pip, old Jap, come off it—”_—! 

“Look, what can ‘you save her from?” His eyes are pry- 
ing Slothrop away from his comfort. Rain is drumming 
now on the awnings, spilling in clear lacework from the 
edges. 


Sn ee 


In the Zone 559 


“But wait a minute. Oh, shit, that woman yesterday, in 
that Sprudelhof—” 

“Yes. Remember Greta also saw you coming up out of 
the river. Now think of all the folklore among these peo- 
ple about radioactivity—these travelers from spa to spa, 
season after season. It’s grace. It’s the holy waters of 
Lourdes. This mysterious radiation that can cure so 
much—might it be the ultimate cure?” 

Whe? 

“I watched her face as you came aboard. I was with 
‘her at the edge of one radioactive night. I know what she 
saw this time. One of those children—preserved, nourished 
by the mud, the radium, growing taller and stronger while 

slowly, viscous and slow, the currents bore him along 
underground, year by year, until at last, grown to man- 
hood, he came to the river, came up out of the black 
radiance of herself to find her again, Shekhinah, bride, 
queen, daughter. And mother. Motherly as sheltering mud 
and glowing pitchblende—” 

Almost-directly overhead, thunder suddenly breaks in a 
blinding egg of sound. Somewhere inside the blast, Slo- 
throp has murmured, “Quit fooling.” 

“Are you going to risk finding out?” 

Who is this, oh sure it’s a Jap ensign, looking at me like 
this. But where are Bianca’s arms, her defenseless mouth. 
... Well in a day or two we'll be in Swinemiinde, right?” 
talking to keep from—get up from the table then, you 
asshole— 

“We'll all just keep moving, that’s all. In the end it 
doesn’t matter.” 

“Look, you’ve got kids, how can you say that? Is that 
all you want, just to ‘keep moving’?” 

“T want to see the war over in the Pacific so that I can 
go home. Since you ask. It’s the season of the plum rains 
now, the Bai-u, when all the plums are ripening. I want 
only to be with Michiko and our girls, and once I’m there, 
never to leave Hiroshima again. I think you'd like it there. 
It’s a city on Honshu, on the Inland Sea, very pretty, a 
_ perfect size, big enough for city excitement, small enough 
. for the serenity a man needs. But these people are not 

returning, they are leaving their homes you see—” 

But one of the knots securing the rain-heavy awning to 


dS) 


: 
¥ 


560 Graviry’s Rarnsow 


its frame has given way, white small-stuff unlacing rapidly, 

whipping around in the rain. The awning sags, funneling 

a igh at Slothrop and Morituri, and they flee below 
ecks, 

They get separated in a crowd of newly-risen roisterers. 
There is hardly a thing now in Slothrop’s head but getting 
to Bianca. At the end of the passageway, across a score of 
empty faces, he spots Stefania in white cardigan and slacks, 
beckoning. It takes him five minutes to thread his way to 
her, by which time he’s picked up a brandy Alexander, a 
party hat, a sign taped to his back urging whoever reads 
it, in Low Pomeranian, to kick Slothrop, lipstick smudges 
in three shades of magenta, and a black Italian maduro 
someone has thoughtfully already lit, 

“You may look like the soul of conviviality,” Stefania 
greets him, “but it doesn’t fool me. Under that cheerful 
mask is the face of a Jonah.” 

“You mean, uh, the, uh—” ) 

“I mean Margherita. She’s locked herself in the head. 
Hysterical. Nobody can bring her out.” 

“So you're looking at me. How about Thanatz?” 

“Thanatz has disappeared, and so has Bianca.” 

“Oh, shit.” . 

“Margherita thinks you’ve done away with her.” 

“Not me.” He gives her a quick rundown of Ensign 
Morituri’s tale. Some of her élan, her resilience, go away. 
She bites a fingernail. 

“Yes, there were rumors. Sigmund, before he vanished, 
leaked just enough to titillate people, but never got spe- 
cific. That was his style. Listen, Slothrop. Do you think 
Bianca’s in any danger?” 

“Tll try to find out.” He is interrupted here by a swift 
kick in the ass, ; 

“Unlucky you,” crows a voice behind them. “I’m the 
only one on board who reads Low Pomeranian.” 

“Unlucky you,” Stefania nods. 

“All I wanted was a free ride to Swinemiinde.” 

But like Stefania sez, “There’s only one free ride. Mean- 
time, start working off the fare for this one. Go see Mar- 
gherita.” 

“You want me to—come on.” 

“We don’t want anything to happen.” 


In the Zone 561 


One of the General Orders aboard this vessel. Nothing 
shall happen. Well, Slothrop politely sticks the rest of his 
cigar between Mme. Procalowska’s teeth and leaves her 
puffing on it, fists jammed in her sweater pockets. 

. Bianca isn’t in the engine room. He moves around in 
pulsing bulblight, among asbestos-packed masses, burning 
himself once or twice where insulation’s missing, looking 
into pale recesses, shadows, wondering about his own in- 
sulation here. Nothing but machinery, noise. He heads for 
the ladder. A scrap of red is waiting for him... no, only 
sher frock, with a damp trace of his own semen still at the 
hem... this loud humidity has kept it there. He crouches, 
holding the garment, smelling her smell. I'm a child, I 

_know how to hide, and I can hide you. “Bianca,” he calls, 
“Bianca, come out.” 

Gathered about the door to the head, he finds an assort- 
ment of upper-class layabouts and drunks blocking the 
passageway along with a litter of bottles and glassware, 
and a seated circle of cocaine habitués, crystal birds fly- 
ing up into forests of nose hair off the point of a gold and 
ruby dagger, Slothrop pushes through, leans on the door 
and calls Margherita’s name. 

“Go away.” ; 

“You don’t have to come out. Just let me in.” 

“I know who you are.” 

“Please.” 

“They were very clever, sending you as poor Max. But 
it won’t work now.” 

| “Tm through with Them. I swear it. I need you, Greta.” 
Bullshit. For what? 

“They'll kill you, then. Go away.” 

_. “I know where Bianca is.” 

“What have you done with her?” 

“Just—will you let me in?” After a full minute’s silence, 
she does. A funseeker or two tries to push in, but he slams 
the door and locks it again. Greta is wearing nothing but 
a black chemise. Strokes of black hair curl high on her 
thighs. Her face is white, old, strained. 

“Where is she?” 
. “Hiding.” 

“From me?” 

_ “From Them.” 


562 Gravity’s Rainsow 


A quick look at him. Too many mirrors, razors, scissors, 
lights. Too white. “But you’re one of Them.” 

“Quit it, you know I’m not.” 

“You are. You came up out of the river.” — 

“Well, that’s cause I fell in, Greta.” 

“Then They made you.” é 

He watches her playing, nervous, with strands of her 
hair. The Anubis has begun to rock some, but the sickness 
rising in him is for his head, not his stomach. As she 
begins to talk, nausea begins to fill him: a glowing black 
mudslide of nausea.... 


O 


It was always easy for men to come and tell her who to 
be. Other girls of her generation grew up asking: “Who 
am IP” For them it was a question full of pain and strug- 
gle. For Gretel it was hardly even a question. She had 
more identities than she knew what to do with. Some of 
these Gretels have been only the sketchiest of surfaces— 
others are deeper. Many have incredible gifts, antigravity, 
dreams of prophecy... comatic images surround their 
faces, glowing in the air; the light itself is actually crying 
tears, weeping in this stylized way, as she is borne along 
through the mechanical cities, the meteorite walls draped 
in midair, every hollow and socket empty as a bone, and 
the failing shadow that shines black all around it... or is 
held in staring postures, long gowns, fringe and alchemical 
symbol, veils flowing from leather skullcaps padded con- 
centric as a bike-racer’s helmet, with crackling-tower and 
obsidian helix, with drive belts and rollers, with strange 
airship passages that thread underneath archés, solemnly, 
past louvers and giant fins in the city mist... . 


In Weisse Sandwiiste von Neumexiko she played a cow- 
girl. First thing, they'd asked, “Can you roads “Of course,” 
she'd answered, Never been closer than ro 
time of war to any horse in her life, but she needed the 
work. When the moment came to saddle up, it never. oc- 
curred to her to be afraid of the beast pressing up between 


dside ditches in 


her thighs. It was an American horse named Snake. | 


In the Zone 563 


_ Trained or not, it could have run away with her, even 

_ killed her. But they pranced the screen full of the Sagit- 
tarian fire, Gretel and that colt, and her smile never drew 
back. 


Here is one of the veils she has shed, a thin white scum, 
a caustic residue from one recent night in Berlin. “While 
you were asleep, I left the house. I went out in the street, 
without my shoes. I found a corpse. A man. A week’s 
gray beard and old gray suit....” It was lying still and 
very white behind a wall. She lay down beside it and put 
her arms around it. There was frost. The body rolled 
toward her and the wrinkles stayed frozen in the cloth. 
She felt its bristled face rub her own cheek. The smell was 
no worse than cold meat from the icebox. She lay, holding 
it, till morning. | 

“Tell me how it is in your land.” What woke her? Boots 
in the street, an early steamshovel. She can hardly hear 

her tired whispering. 

Corpse answers: “We live very far beneath the black 
mud, Days of traveling.” Though she couldn’t move its 
limbs easily as a doll’s, she could make it say and think 
exactly what she wished. 

For an instant too she did wonder—not quite in words— 
if that’s how her own soft mind might feel, under the 
fingers of Those who... 

“Mm, it’s snug down here. Now and then you can pick 
up something from Them—a distant rumbling, the im- 

’ plied silhouette of some explosion, conducted here through 

__ the earth overhead ... but nothing, ever, too close, It’s so 

_ dark that things glow. We have flight. There’s no sex. But 
there are fantasies, even many of those we used to attach 
to sex—that we once modulated its energy with....” 


As the dizzy debutante Lotte Liistig, she found herself 
during a flood, disguised as a scrubwoman, proceeding 

_ downriver in a bathtub with rich playboy Max Schlepzig. 
Every girl’s dream. Name of the movie was Jugend Herauf! 

. (a lighthearted pun, of course, on the then popular phrase 
_ “Juden heraus!”), Actually, all the bathtub scenes were 
_ process shots—she never did get to go out on the river in 
, the bathtub with Max, all that was done with doubles, 
AM 


a) 


564 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


and in the final print it survives only as a very murky 
long shot. The figures. are darkened and deformed, resem- 
bling apes, and the quality of the light is peculiar, as if 
the whole scene were engraved on dark metal such as lead. 
Greta’s double was actually an Italian stunt man named 
Blazzo in a long blonde wig. They carried on a romance 
for a while. But Greta wouldn’t go to bed with him, unless 
he wore that wig/ 

Out on the river the rain lashes: the rapids can now be 
heard approaching, still impossible to see, but real, and 
inevitable. And the doubles both experience an odd, tick- 
lish fear now that perhaps they are really lost, and that 
there is really no camera on shore behind the fine gray 
scribbling of willows... all the crew, sound-men, grips, 
gaffers have left...or never even arrived...and what 
was that the currents just brought to knock against our 
snow-white cockle shell? and what was that thud, so 
stiffened and so mute? 


Bianca is usually silver, or of no color at all; thousands 
of times taken, strained through glass, warped in and out 
the violet-bleeding interfaces of Double and Triple Protars, 
Schneider Angulons, Voigtlinder Collinears, Steinheil 
Orthostigmats, the Gundlach Tumer-Reichs of 1895. For 
Greta it is her daughter’s soul each time, an inexhaustible 
soul,... This scarf of an only child, tucked in waist-high, 
always out vulnerable to the wind. To call her an exten- 
sion of her mother’s ego is of course to invite the bitterest 
sarcasm. But it’s possible, now and then, for Greta to see 
Bianca in other children, ghostly as a double exposure... 
clearly yes very clearly in Gottfried, the young pet and 
protégé of Captain Blicero. 


“Pull down my straps for a moment, Is it dark enough? 
Look. Thanatz said they were luminous. That he knew 
each one by heart. They’re very white today, aren't they? 
Hmm. Long and white, like cobwebs. ic re on my ass 
too. Around the insides of my thighs....”’ Many times, 
afterward, after the blood had stopped and he had put on. 
the alcohol, Thanatz would sit with her ‘lying across his 
knees, and read the scars down her back, as a gypsy reads 
a palm. Life-scar, heart-scar. Croix mystique. What for- 


In the Zone 565 


- tunes and fantasies! He was so exalted, after the whip- 
pings. So taken away by the idea that they would win 
out, escape. He'd fall asleep before the wildness and hope 
had quite left him. She loved him most at those moments, 
\just before sleep, her own dorsal side aflame, his little 
head heavy on her breast, while scar-tissue formed silently 
on her, cell by cell, in the night. She felt almost safe.... 


Each time the lash struck, each attack, in her helpless- 

ness to escape, there would come to her a single vision, 

/ only one, for each peak of pain. The Eye at the top of 
the pyramid, The sacrificial city, with figures in rust- 
colored robes, The dark woman waiting at the end of the 

_ street. The hooded face of sorrowing Denmark, leaning out 
over Germany. The cherry-red coals falling through the 
night. Bianca in g Spanish dancer’s costume, stroking the 
barrel of a gun.. 

Out by one rocket site; in the pine woods, Thanatz and 
Gretel found an old road that no one used any more. 
Pieces of pavement were visible here and there among the 
green underbrush. It seemed that if they followed the road 
they would come to a town, a station or outpost... it 
wasn't at all clear what they would find. But the place 
would be long’ deserted. 

They held hands. Thanatz wore an old jacket of green 
suede, with patches on the sleeves. Gretel wore her camel’s- 

hair coat and a white kerchief. In places, pine needles 
were drifted across the old roadway, so deep as to silence 
their footsteps. 

They came to a slide where years ago the road had 

. been washed away. Gravel spilled salt-and-pepper down- 
hill toward a river they heard but couldn’t see. An old 
automobile, a Hannomag Storm, hung there, nose-down, 
one door smashed open. The lavender-gray metal shell had 
_ been picked clean ‘as the skeleton of a deer. Somewhere in 
these woods was the presence that had done this. They 
skirted the wreck, afraid to come too near the spidered 
glass, the hard mortality in the shadows of the front seat. 
_ Remains of houses could be glimpsed, back in the trees. 
. There was now a retreat of the light, though it was still 
before noon, and the forest grew no thicker here. In the 
P middle of the road, giant turds showed up, fresh, laid in 
»), 
ny 


a 


566 Gravirty’s RaInsow 


twists like strands of rope—dark and knotted. What could 
have left them? 

At the same instant, she and Thanatz both realized that 
for hours now they must have been walking through the 
ruin of a great city, not an ancient ruin, but brought down 
inside their lifetime. Ahead of them, the path curved on, 
into trees. But something stood now between them and 
whatever lay around the curve: invisible, impalpable... 
some monitor, Saying, “Not one step farther. That’s all. 
Not one. Go back now.” ; 

It was impossible to move any farther into it. They 
were both terrified. They tumed, feeling it at their backs, 
and moved away quickly. 

Back at the SchuB8stelle they found Blicero in his final 
madness. The trunks in the cold little clearing were 
stripped of bark, bleeding with beads of gum from the 
rocket blasts. 

“He could have banished us. Blicero was a local deity. 
He wouldn’t even have needed a piece of paper. But he 
wanted us all to stay. He gave us the best there was, beds, 

- food, liquor, drugs. Something was being planned, it in- 
volved the boy Gottfried, that was as unmistakable as the 
smell of resin, first thing those blue hazy mornings. But 
Blicero would tell us nothing. 

“We moved into the Heath. There were oilfields, and 
blackened earth. Jabos flew over in diamond shapes, hunt- 
ing us. Blicero had grown on, into another animal...a 
werewolf... but with no humanity left in its eyes: that 
had faded out, day after day, and been replaced by gray 
furrows, red veins in patterns that weren’t human. Islands: 
clotted islands in the sea. Sometimes eyen the topographic 
lines, nested on a common point, ‘It is the map of my 
Ur-Heimat,’ imagine a shriek so quiet it’s almost a whisper, 
‘the Kingdom of Lord Blicero, A white land.’ I had a 
sudden understanding: he was seeing the world now in 
mythical regions: they had their maps, real mountains, 
‘rivers, and colors. It was not Germany he moved through. 
It was his own space. But he was taking us along with 
him! My cunt swelled with blood at the danger, the chances 
for our annihilation, delicious never knowing when it 
would come down because the space and time were 


In the Zone 567 


_Blicero’s own. ... He did not fall back along roads, he did 
‘not cross bridges or lowlands. We sailed Lower Saxony, 

island to island. Each firing-site was another island, in a 
white sea. Each island had its peak in the center... was. 

‘it the position of the Rocket itself? the moment of liftoff? 
A German Odyssey. Which one would be the last, the 
home island? 

“T keep forgetting to ask Thanatz whatever became of 
Gottfried. Thanatz was. allowed to stay with the battery. 
But I was taken away: driven in a Hispano-Suiza with 
Blicero himself, out through the gray weather to a petro- 
chemical plant that for days had stalked us in a wheel at 
our horizon, black and broken towers in the distance, 
clustered together, a flame that always burned at the top 
of one stack. It was the Castle: Blicero looked over, about 
‘to speak, and I said, “The Castle.’ The mouth smiled 
quickly, but absent: the wrinkled wolf-eyes had gone even 
beyond these domestic moments of telepathy, on into its 
animal north, to a persistence on the hard edge of death 
I can’t imagine, tough cells with the smallest possible 
flicker inside, running on nothing but ice, or less. He 
called me Katje. ‘Youll see that your little trick won’t 
work again. Not now, Katje.’ I wasn’t frightened. It was 
madness I could understand, or else the hallucinating of 
the very old. The silver stork flew wings-down into our 
wind, brow low and legs back, Prussian occipital knot 
behind: on its shiny surfaces now appeared black swirls 
‘of limousines and staff cars in the driveway of the main 
office. I saw a light plane, a two-seater, at the edge of the 
parking lot. The faces of the men inside seemed familiar. 
I knew them from films, the power and the gravity were 
there—they were important men, but I only recognized 
one: Generaldirektor Smaragd, from Leverkusen. An el- 
derly man who used a cane, a notorious spiritualist before 
the War, and, it seemed, even now. ‘Greta,’ he smiled, 
groping for my hand. “Ah, we’re all here.’ But his charm 
was shared by none of the others. They'd all been waiting 
for Blicero. A meeting of nobles in the Castle. They went 
into the board room. I was left with an assistant named 
Drohne, high forehead, graying hair, always fussing with - 
his necktie. He’d seen every one of my films. We moved 
off into the machinery. Through the windows of the board 


4 


Ss 


568 Gravity’s RAINBow 


room I saw them at a round conference table, with some- 
thing in the center. It was gray, plastic, shining, light 
moving on its surfaces. “What is it?’ I asked, vamping 
Drohne. He took me out of earshot of the others. ‘I think 
it’s for the F-Gerit,’ he whispered.” 

“FP” sez Slothrop, “F-Gerat, you sure of that?” 

“Some letter.” 

a Sg 

“All right, S. They are children at the threshold of lan- 
guage with these words they make up. It looked to me 
like an ectoplasm—something they had forced, by their 
joint will, to materialize on the table. No one’s lips were 
moving. It was a séance. I understood then that Blicero 
had brought me across a frontier. Had injected me at last 
into his native space without a tremor of pain. I was free. 
Men crowded behind me in the corridor, blocking the way 
back. Drohne’s hand was sweating on my sleeve. He was a 
plastics connoisseur. Flipping his fingernail against a large 
clear African mask, cocking his ear—‘Can you hear it? 
The true ring of Polystyrene...’ and going into raptures 
for me over a heavy chalice of methyl methacrylate, a 
replica of the Sangraal.... We were by a tower reactor. 
A strong paint-thinner smell was in the air. Clear rods of 
some plastic came hissing out through an extruder at the 
bottom of the tower, into cooling channels, or into a 
chopper. The heat was heavy in the room. I thought of 
something very deep, black and viscous, feeding this fac- 
tory. From outside I héard motors. Were they all leaving? 
Why was I here? Plastic serpents crawled endlessly to left 
and right. The erections of my escort tried to craw] out 
the openings in their clothes. I could do whatever I 
wanted, Black radiant and deep. I knelt and began un- 
buttoning Drohne’s trousers. But two others took me by the” 
arms and dragged me off into a warehouse area. Others 
followed, or entered from other doors. Great curtains of — 
styrene or vinyl, in all colors, opaque and transparent, hung 
row after row from overhead, They flared like the northern — 
lights. I felt that somewhere beyond them was an audience, © 
waiting for something to begin. Drohne and the men_ 
stretched me out on an inflatable plastic mattress. All’ 
around, I watched a clear crumbling of the air, or of the 
light. Someone said ‘butadiene, and I heard beauty 
dying. ... Plastic rustled and snapped around us, closing 


Bean: _ In the Zone 569 


‘us in, in ghost white. They took away my clothes and 
dressed me in.an exotic costume of some black polymer, 
very tight at the waist, open at the crotch. It felt alive on 
me. ‘Forget leather, forget satin,’ shivered Drohne. “This is 
Imipolex, the material of the future.’ I can’t describe its 
perfume, or how it felt—the luxury. The moment it touched 
them it brought my nipples up swollen and begging to be 
bitten. I wanted’to feel it against my cunt. Nothing I ever 
wore, before or since, aroused me quite as much as Imi- 
- polex. They promised me brassieres, chemises, stockings, 
gowns of the same material. Drohne had strapped on a 
gigantic Imipolex penis over his own. I rubbed my face 
against it, it was so delicious.... There was an abyss be- 
tween my feet. Things, memories, no way to distinguish 
them any more, went tumbling downward through my 
head. A torrent. I was evacuating all these, out into some 
' void’... from my vertex, curling, bright-colored hallucina- 
tions went streaming... baubles, amusing lines of dia- 
logue, objets d’art...I was letting them all go. Holding 
none. Was this ‘submission,’ then—letting all these go? 

“I don’t know how long they kept me there. I slept, I 
woke. Men appeared and vanished. Time had lost mean- 
ing. One morning I was outside the factory, naked, in the 
rain. Nothing grew there. Something had been deposited 
in a great fan that went on for miles, Some tarry kind of 
waste. I had to walk all the way back to the firing site. 
_They were all gone. Thanatz had left a note, asking me to 

‘try to get to Swinemiinde. Something must have happened 
‘at the site. There was a silence in that clearing Id felt 
only once before. Once, in. Mexico. The year I was in 
_ America. We were very deep in the jungle. We came on a 
flight of stone steps, covered with vines, fungus, centuries 
‘of decay. The others climbed to the top, but I couldn’t. It 
was the same as the day with Thanatz, in the pine forest. 
I felt a silence waiting for me up there. Not for them, but 
for me alone ...my own personal silence... .” 


f } O 

; 

_Up on the bridge of the Anubis, the storm paws loudly on 
glass, great wet flippers falling at random in out of 

the night whap! the living shape visible just for the rain- 

. 

3 er * : 

; att . 


570 Gravity's RAINBOW 


bow edge of the sound—it takes a certain kind of maniac, 
at least a Polish cavalry officer, to stand in this pose be- 
hind such brittle thin separation, and stare each blow full 
in its muscularity. Behind Procalowski the clinometer bob 
goes to and fro with his ship’s rolling: a peadulum in a 
dream. Stormlight has turned the lines of his face black, 
black as his eyes, black as the watchcap cocked so tough 
and salty aslant the furrows of his forehead. Light clusters, 
clear, deep, on the face of the radio gear... fans up softly 
off the dial of the pelorus... spills out portholes onto the 
white river. Inexplicably, the afternoon has been going on 
for longer than it should. Daylight has been declining for 
too many hours. Corposants have begun to flicker now in 
the rigging. The storm yanks at rope and cable, the cloudy 
night goes white and loud, in huge spasms. Procalowski 
smokes a cigar and studies charts of the Oder Haff. 

All this light. Are the Russian lookouts watching from 
shore, waiting in the rain? Is this arm of the passage being 
kept in grease-pencil, X by dutiful X, across some field of 
Russian plastic, inside where cobwebs whiten the German 
windows nobody needs to stand at, where phosphor grass 
ripples across the A-scopes and the play you feel through 
the hand-crank in the invisible teeth is the difference bs- 
tween hit and miss.... Vaslav—is the pip you see there 
even a shipP In the Zone, in these days, there is endless 
simulation—standing waves in the water, large drone-birds, 
so well-known as to have nicknames among the operators, 
wayward balloons, flotsam from other theatres of war 
(Brazilian oildrums, whisky cases stenciled for Fort-Lamy), 
observers from other galaxies, episodes of smoke, moments 
of high albedo—your real targets are hard to come by. 
Too much confusion out here for most replacements and 
late draftees. Only the older scope hands can still maintain 
a sense of the appropriate: over the watches of their Dura- 
tions, jittering electric green for what must have seemed, 
at first, forever, they have come to understand distribu- 
tion... they have learned.a visual mercy. | 

How probable is the Anubis in this estuary tonight? Its 
schedule has lapsed, fashionably, unavoably it should 
have been through Swinemiinde weeks ago, but the Vistula 
was under Soviet interdiction to the white ship. The Rus- 
sians even had a guard posted on board for a while, till 


In the Zone 571 


the Anubian ladies vamped them off long enough to single 
up all lines—and so the last reprise of Polish homeland 
was on, across these watar-meadows of the north, radio 
messages following them in clear one day and code the 
next, an early and shapeless situation, dithering between 
executioner’s silence and the Big Time. There are inter- 
national reasons for an Anubis Affair right now, and also 
reasons against, and the arguments go on, too remote to 
gather, and orders are changed hour to hour. 

Pitching and rolling furiously, the Anubis drives north- 

_ward. Lightning flickers all around the horizon, and 
thunder that reminds the military men on board of drum- 
fire announcing battles they’re not sure now if they sur- 
vived or still dream, still can wake up into and die.... 
Weather decks shine slick and bare. Party litter clogs the 
drains. Stale fat-smoke goes oozing out the galley porthole 
into the rain. The saloon’s been set up for baccarat, and 
filthy movies are showing in. the boiler room. The second 
dog watch is about to come on. The white ship settles, 
like the soul of a kerosene lamp just lit, into its evening 
routine. = 

Partygoers stagger fore and aft, evening clothes deco- 
rated with sunbursts of vomit. Ladies lie out in the rain, 
nipples erect and heaving under drenched silk. Stewards 
skid along the decks with salvers of Dramamine and bicar- 
bonate. Barfing aristocracy sag all down the lifelines. Here 
comes Slothrop now, down a ladder to the main deck, 
bounced by the rolling off of alternate manropes, feeling 
none too keen. He’s lost Bianca. Gone fussing through the 
ship doubling back again and again, can’t find her any 
more than his reason for leaving her this morning. 

It matters, but how much? Now that Margherita has 
wept to him, across the stringless lyre and bitter chasm of 
a ship’s toilet, of her last days with Blicero, he knows as 
well as he has to that it’s the S-Ger&t after all that’s fol- 
lowing him, it and the pale plastic ubiquity of Laszlo 
Jamf. That if he’s been seeker and sought, well, he’s also 
baited, and bait. The Imipolex question was planted for 
him by somebody, back at the Casino Hermann Goering, 

with hopes it would flower into a full Imipolectique with 
its own potency in the Zone—but They knew Slothrop 
would jump for it. Looks like there are sub-Slothrop needs ~ 


A 


Be 


572 Gravity's RAINBOW ; 


They know about, and he doesn’t: this is humiliating on 
the face of it, but now there’s also the even more annoy- 
ing question, What do I need that badly? 

Even a month ago, given a day or two of peace, he 
might have found his way back to the September after- 
noon, to the stiff cock in his pants sprung fine as a dowser’s 
wand trying to point up at what was hanging there in the 
sky for everybody. Dowsing Rockets is a gift, and he had 
it, suffered from it, trying to fill his body to the pores and 
follicles with ringing prurience . . . to enter, to be filled... 
to go hunting after... to be shown... to begin to scream 
...to open arms legs mouth asshole eyes nostrils without 
a hope of mercy to its intention waiting in the sky paler 
than dim commercial Jesus.... 

But nowadays, some kind of space he cannot go against 
has opened behind Slothrop, bridges that might have led 
back are down now for good. He is growing less anxious 
about betraying those who trust him. He feels obligations 
less immediately. There is, in fact, a general loss of emo- 
tion, a numbness he ought to be alarmed at, but can’t 
quite... ; 

Can't... ' 

Russian transmissions come crackling out of ship’s radio, 
and the static blows like sheets of rain. Lights have begun 
to appear on shore. Procalowski throws a master switch 
and cuts off all the lights of the Anubis. St. Elmo’s fire will 
be seen spurting at moments from crossends, from sharp 
points, fluttering white as telltales about the antennas and 
stays. 

The white ship, camouflaged in the storm, will slip by 
Stettin’s great ruin in silence. Rain will slacken for a 
moment to port and reveal a few last broken derricks and — 
charred warehouses so wet and gleaming you can almost 
smell them, and a beginning of marshland you can smell, 
where no one lives. And then the shore again will be in- 
visible as the open sea’s. The Oder Haff will grow wider 
around the Anubis. No patrol boats will be out tonight. — 
Whitecaps will come slamming in out of the darkness, and © 
break high over the bow, and brine stream from the golden © 
jackal mouth... Count Wafna lurch aft in nothing but his — 
white bow tie, hands full of red, white, and blue chips that — 
spill and clatter on deck, and he'll never cash them in... 


i 


: 4 
| q 


In the Zone 573 


_the Countess Bibescue dreaming by the fo’c’sle of Bucha- 
rest four years ago, the January terror, the Iron Guard on 
the radio screaming Long Live Death, and the bodies of 
Jews and Leftists hung on the hooks of the city slaughter- 
houses, dripping on the boards smelling of meat and hide, 
having her breasts sucked by a boy of 6 or 7 in a velvet 
Fauntleroy suit, their wet hair flowing together indistin- 
guishable as their moans now, will vanish inside sudden 
whiteness exploding over the bow . . . and stockings ladder, 
and silk frocks over rayon slips make swarming moirés... 
hardons go limp without warning, bone buttons shake in 
terror... lights be thrown on again and the deck become ~ 
a blinding mirror... and not too long after this, Slothrop 


_ will think he sees her, think he has found Bianca again— 


dark eyelashes plastered shut and face running with rain, 
he will see her lose her footing on the slimy deck, just as 


the Anubis starts a hard roll to port, and even at this 


stage of things—even in his distance—he will lunge after 
her without thinking much, slip himself as she vanishes 
under the chalky lifelines and gone, stagger trying to get 
back but be hit too soon in the kidneys and be flipped that 
easy over the side and it’s adios to the Anubis and all its 
screaming Fascist cargo, already no more ship, not even 
black sky as the rain drives down his falling eyes now in 


- quick needlestrokes, and he hits, without a call for help, 


just a meek tearful oh fuck, tears that will add nothing to 
the whipped white desolation that passes for the Oder 
Haff tonight.... 


O 


The voices are German. Looks like a fishing smack here, 
stripped for some reason of nets and booms. Cargo piled 
on deck. A pink-faced youth is peering down at Slothrop 
from midships, rocking in, rearing back. “He’s wearing 
evening clothes,” calling in to the pilot house. “Is that 
good or bad? You're not with the military government, are 
your” 

“Jesus, kid, ’'m drowning. Ill sign a form if you want.” 
Well, that’s Howdy Podner in German. The youth reaches 
out a pink hand whose palm is crusted with barnacles, and 


574 Graviry’s RAInBow 


hauls him on up, ears freezing, salty snot pouring out his 
nose, flopping onto a wood deck that reeks with genera- | 
tions of fish and is scarred bright from more solid cargo. — 
The boat gets under way again with this tremendous surge - 
of acceleration. Slothrop is sent rolling wetly aft. Behind — 
them a great roostertail foams erect against the rain. 
Maniacal laughter blows aft from the pilot house. “Hey — 
who, or what, is in command of this vessel, here?” 

“My mother,” the pink boy crouching beside him with 
an apologetic and helpless look. “The terror of the high 
seas.” 

This apple-cheeked lady is Frau Gnahb, and her kid’s 
name is Otto, When she’s feeling affectionate she calls him 
“the Silent Otto,” which she thinks is very funny, but it 
dates her. While Slothrop gets out of the tuxedo and hangs 
it up inside to dry, wrapping himself in an old army 
blanket, mother and son tell him how they run black 
market items all along the Baltic coast. Who else would be 
out tonight, during a stormP He has a trustworthy face, 
Slothrop does, people will tell him anything. Right now_ 
seems they’re headed for Swinemiinde to take on cargo for 
a run tomorrow up the coast of Usedom. 

“Do you know a man in a white suit,” quoting Geli 
Tripping from a few eras back, “who’s supposed to be on 
the Strand-Promenade in that Swinemiimde every day 
around noon?” 

Frau Gnahb takes a pinch of snuff, and beams. “Every- 
body does. He’s the white knight of the black market, as I 
am queen of the coastal trade.” 

“Der Springer, right?” 

“Nobody else.” 

Nobody else. Up in his pants pocket Slothrop is still 
packing around the chesspiece old Saéure Bummer gave 
him. By it shall Springer know him. Slothrop falls asleep — 
in the pilot house, gets in two or three hours, during which — 
Bianca comes to snuggle in under his blanket with him. 
“Youre really i in that Europe now,” she grins, hugging him. | 

“Oh my goo’ness,” Slothrop keeps saying, his voice exactly 
like Shirley Temple’s, out of his control, It sure is em-— 
barrassing. He wakes to sunlight, gulls squealing, smell of — 
number 2 fuel oil, the booming of wine barrels down 
racketing planks to shore. They are docked in Swine- 


In the Zone 575 


miinde, by the sagging long ash remains of warehouses. 
Frau Gnahb is supervising some offloading. Otto has a tin 
can of honest-to-God Bohnenkaffee simmering, “First I’ve 
had in a while,” Slothrop scorching his mouth. 

“Black market,” purrs the Silent Otto. “Good business to 
be in.” 

“I was in it for a while... .” Oh, yes, and he’s left the 
last of that Bodine hashish, hasn’t he, several fucking 
ounces in fact, back on the Anubis, wasn’t that clever. See 
the sugar bowl do the Tootsie Roll with the big, bad, 
Devil’s food cake— 

“Nice morning,” Otto remarks. 

Slothrop puts his tux back on, wrinkled and shrunken 
and almost dry, and debarks with Otto to find Der 
Springer. It seems to be Springer who’s chartered today’s 
trip up the coast. Slothrop keeps looking around for the 
Anubis, but she’s nowhere in sight. In the distances, gan- 
tries huddle together, skeletal, presiding over the waste 
that came upon this port so sudden. The Russian assault 
in the spring has complicated the layout here. The white 
ship could be hiding behind any of these heaps of dock- 
yard wreckage. Come out, come out.... 

The storm has blown away, the breeze is mild today 
and the sky lies overhead in a perfect interference-pattern, 
mackerel gray and blue. Someplace military machines are 
rooting and clanking. Men and women are hollering near 

.and far in Russian. Otto and Slothrop dodge them down 
‘alleys flanked by the remains of half-timbered houses, 
stepped out story by story, about to meet overhead after 
centuries of imperceptible toppling. Men in black-billed 
‘caps sit on stoops, watching hands for cigarettes. In a little 
square, market stalls are set up, wood frames and old, 
stained canvas shimmering when the breeze passes 
through. Russian soldiers lean against posts or benches 
talking to girls in dirndls and white knee-socks, all nearly 
still as statues. Market wagons stand unhitched with 
tongues tilted to the ground and floors covered with bur- 
lap and straw and traces of produce. Dogs sniff among the 
-mud negatives of tank treads. Two men in dark old blue 
‘uniforms work their way along with hose and broom, 
cleaning away garbage and stone-dust with salt water 
| pumped up from the harbor. Two little girls chase round 


576 Gravity's Ramnsow 


and round a guagly red kiosk plastered with chromos of 
Stalin. Workers in leather caps, blinking, morning-faced, 
pedal down to the docks with lunchboxes slung on handle 
bars. Pigeons and seagulls feint for scraps in the gutters. 
Women with empty string bags hurry by light as ghosts. 
A lone sapling in the street sings with a blockful of birds 
you can’t see. 

Just as Geli said, out on the steel-littered promenade, 
kicking stones, watching the water, eyes idly combing the 
beach for the odd watch or gold eyeglass frame, waiting 
for whoever will show up, is The Man. About 50, bleak 
and neutral-colored eyes, hair thick at the sides of his head 
and brushed back. 

Slothrop flashes the plastic knight. Der Springer smiles 
and bows. 

“Gerhardt von Gdll, at your service.” They shake hands, 
though Slothrop’s is prickling in an unpleasant way. 

Gulls cry, waves flatten on the strand. “Uh,” Slothrop 
sez, “I have this kind of trick ear, you'll have to—you say 
Gerhardt von what now?” This mackerel sky has begun to 
look less like a moiré, and more like a chessboard. “I guess 
we have a friend in common. Well, that Margherita Erd- 
mann. Saw her last night. Yup... .” 

“She’s supposed to be dead.” He takes Slothrop’s arm, 
and they all begin to stroll along the promenade. . 

'“W-well you're supposed to be a movie director.” 

“Same thing,” lighting American cigarettes for every- 
body. “Same problems of control. But more intense. As to 
some musical ears, dissonance is really a higher form of 
consonance. You’ve heard about Anton Webern? Very sad.” 

“Tt was a mistake. He was innocent.” 

“Ha. Of course he was. But mistakes are part of it too—_ 
everything fits. One sees how it fits, jaP learns patterns, 
adjusts to rhythms, one day you are no longer an actor, 
but free now, over on the other side of the camera. No 
dramatic call to the front office—just waking up one day, 
and knowing that Queen, Bishop, and ‘King are only 
splendid cripples, and pawns, even those; that reach the - 
final row, are condemned to creep in two dimensions, and 
no Tower will ever rise or descend—no: flight has been 
given only to the. Springer!” hg 

“Right, Springer,” sez Otto. 

Four Russian privates come wandering out of a bank of — 


yo 


In the Zone 577 


ruined hotel-fronts, laughing across the promenade, over 
the wall down to the water where they stand throwing 
smooth stones, kicking waves, singing to each other. Not 
much of a liberty town, Swinemiinde. Slothrop fills von 
Goll in on Margherita, trying not to get personal. But some 
of his anxiety over Bianca must be coming through. Von 
Goll shakes his arm, a kindly uncle. “There now. I wouldn’t 
worry. Bianca’s a clever child, and her mother is hardly a 
destroying goddess.” 

' “You're a comfort, Springer.” 

The Baltic, restless Wehrmacht gray, whispers along 
the beach, Von Goll tips an invisible Tyrolean to old ladies 
in black who've come out in pairs to get some sun. Otto 
goes chasing seagulls, hands out in front of him silent- 
moyie style looking to strangle, but always missing his 
bird. Presently they are joined by a party with a lumpy 
nose, stoop, week’s growth of orange and gray whiskers, 
and oversize leather trenchcoat with no trousers on under- 
neath, His name is Narrisch—the same Klaus Narrisch that 
aerodynamics man Horst Achtfaden fingered for the 
Schwarzkommando, the very same. He is carrying by the 
neck an unplucked dead turkey. As they thread their way 
among chunks big and little of Swinemiinde and the battle 
for it last spring, townspeople begin to appear out of the 
ruins, and to straggle close on von Goll’s landward flank, all 
eying this dead bird. Springer reaches inside his white suit 

| Jacket, comes out with a U.S, Army .45, and makes a 

_ casual show of checking its action. His following promptly 

- dwindles by a half. : 
_ “They're hungrier today,” observes Narrisch. 

“True,” replies the Springer, “but today there are fewer 
of them.” 

“Wow,” it occurs to Slothrop, “that’s a shitty thing to 
say.” 

Springer shrugs. “Be compassionate. But don’t make up 
fantasies about them. Despise me, exalt them, but remem- 
ber, we define each other. Elite and preterite, we move 

through a cosmic design of darkness and light, and in all 
humility, I am one of the very few who can comprehend 
it in toto. Consider honestly therefore, young man, which 

“side you would rather be on. While they suffer in per- 
petual shadows, it’s... always—” 


er 


578 Gravity's Rainsow 


4 Bricur Days (Fox-Tror) 


—bright days for the black mar-ket, 

That silver ’n’ gold makes-it shinel 

From the Cor-al Sea to, the sky, blue, Baltic, 

Money’s the mainspring, that makes it all tick—like a 
Blinkin’ beacon, there’s a pricetag peekin’ 

From each décolletage dee-vine— 

Be she green or scar-let, even Mom’s a har-lot, it’s the 
Good Lord’s grand design... 

A-and it’s sunny days-for, the black, black ma(a)rket, 
Cause silver and gold makes it shii-iinel 


Narrisch and Otto joining in here on three-part har- 
mony, while the idle and hungry of Swinemiinde look on, 
whitefaced as patient livestock. But their bodies are only 
implied: wire racks for prewar suits and frocks, too an- 
cient, too glassy with dirt, with passage. 

Leaving the promenade, they pause at a street corner 
while a detachment of Russian infantry and horsemen 
marches by. “Gee, they’re pouring in,” notes Otto. “‘Where’s 
the circus?” 

“Up the coast, kid,” sez Narrisch. 

“What's up the coast,” inquires Slothrop. 

“Look out,” warns Narrisch, “he’s a spy.” 

“Don’t call me ‘kid,’ ” Otto snarls. ~ 

“Spy’s ass,” sez Slothrop. 

“He’s all right,” Springer pats them all on the shoulders, 
Herr Gemiitlich here, “the word’s been out on him for a 
while. He isn’t even armed.” To Slothrop: “You're wel- 
come to come along with us, up the coast. It might be 
interesting for you.” But Slothrop is no dummy. He notices 
how he is getting funny looks from everybody now, includ- 
ing that Springer. 4 

Among the cargo headed up the coast are six chorus 
girls, wearing feathers and spangles under old cloth coats 
to save trunk space, a small pit band at different levels of — 
alcoholic slumber, manymany cases of vodka, and a troupe 
of performing chimpanzees. Otto's suautical-piratical 
mother has one of these chimps comered jinside the pilot — 
house, where they are going at it, the Frau with her in- 
sults, the chimp reaching now and then trying to slap her 
with his floppy banana peel. Ulcerous impresario G, M. B.~ 


In the Zone 579 


Haftung is trying to get Otto’s attention. He has a record 
of always making his appeals to the wrong personnel. 
“That’s Wolfgang in there! He'll murder her!” Wolfgang’s 
his prize chimp, somewhat unstable, does a fair Hitler 
imitation but has this short attention span. 

“Well,” vaguely, “he’d better watch out for my Mom.” 

Framed here in her lozenge of hatchway, it’s much 
clearer just how extensively this old woman has been 
around: she is leaning, lifting, big sweet smile just as 
toothy as can be, peg into that Wolfgang, cooing at him: 

“Deine Mutter . 

“Say, she’s never seen one of those critters before,” 
Slothrop turning to Otto, surprising the youth with a face- 
ful of, call it amiable homicide, “has she—” 

“Ach, she’s fantastic. She knows by instinct—exactly 
how to insult anybody. Doesn’t matter, animal, vegetable— 
I even saw her insult a rock once.” 

“Aw, now—” 

“Really! Ja. A gigantic clummmp of -felsitic debris, last 
year, off the coast of Denmark, she criticized its,” just 
about to fall into one of those mirthless laughs we edge 
away from, “its crystalline structure, for twenty minutes. 
Incredible.” 

Chorus girls have already pried open a case of vodka. 
Haftung, brushing hair that grows only in memory across 
the top of his head, rushes over to scream at them. Boys 
and girls, all ages, tattered and thin, trail across the brow, 
\stevedoring. Against the fair sky, chimps swing from spars 
and antenna, above them seagulls glide by and stare. Wind 
ses, soon a whitecap here and there will start to flicker 
‘out in the harbor. Each child carries a bale or box of a 
‘different shape, color, and size. Springer stands by, pince- 
nez clipped in front of agate eyes, checking off his inven- 
tory in a green morocco book, snails in garlic sauce, one 
gross... three cases cognac... tennis balls, two dozen... 
one Victrola... film, Lucky Pierre Runs Amok, three reels 
-.. binoculars, sixty... wrist-watches...u.s.w., a check- 
mark for each child. 
iJ _ Presently all has been stowed below decks, chimps 

| asleep, musicians wake up, girls surround Haftung and 
call him names, and pinch his cheeks. Otto makes his way 
si the side, hauling in lines as the children cast them 


Bars 


580 ps Gravity’s RaInsow 


off. As the last one is flung away, its eye-splice still in 
midair framing a teardrop vista of gutted Swinemiinde, 
Frau Gnahb, sensing the release from land through her 
feet, gets under way in the usual manner, nearly losing a 
chimp over the fantail and sending Haftung’s half-dozen 
lovelies sprawling in a winsome tangle of legs, bottoms 
and breasts, 

Crosscurrents tug a the boat as it moves out the widen- 
ing funnel of the Swine, toward the sea. Just inside the 
breakwaters, where it foams through breaches bombed 
underwater in the spring look out, Frau Gnahb, with no 
change of expression, swings her wheel full over, goes 
barreling straight at the Sassnitz ferry whoosh veers away 
just in time, cackling at passengers staggering back from 
the rail, gaping after her. “Please, Mother,” silent Otto 
plaintive in the window of the pilot house. In reply the 
good woman commences bellowing a bloodthirsty 


SEA CHANTY 


I'm the Pirate Queen of the Baltic Run, and nobody 
fucks with me— . 
And those who've tried are bones and skulls, and lie 
beneath the sea. 

And the little fish like messengers swim in and out 
their eyes, 

Singing, “Fuck ye not with Gory Gnahb and her 
desperate enterprise!” 


I'll tangle with a battleship, I'll massacre a sloop, 

I’ve sent a hundred souls to hell in one relentless 
swoop— 

I’ve seen the Flying Dutchman, and each time we pass, 
he cries, é ist 

“Oh, steer me clear of Gory Gnahb, and her desperate 
enterprise!” yo 
Whereupon she grips her wheel and aecelerates. They 

find themselves now leaping toward the side of a half- 

sunken merchantman: black concave iron splashed with 

red-lead, each crusted rivet and pitted plate closing in, 

looming over— The woman is clearly unbalanced. Slo- | 

throp shuts his eyes and hangs on to a chorus girl. With a 

é 


In the Zone ‘581 


whoop from the pilot house, the little boat is put over 
hard to port, missing collision by maybe a few coats of 
paint. Otto, caught daydreaming of death, staggers wildly 
by heading over the side. “It’s her sense of humor,” he 
points out, on the way past. Slothrop reaches out grabs 
him by the sweater, and the girl grabs Slothrop by the 
tail of his tuxedo. 

“She gets into something a little illegal,” Otto a mo- 
ment later catching his breath, “you see what happens. I 
don’t know what to do with her.” 

“Poor kid,” the girl smiles. 

“Aw,” sez Otto. 

Slothrop leaves them, always happy to see young people 
get together, and joins von Goll and Narrisch on the fan- 
tail. Frau Gnahb has angled, wallowing, around to the 
northwest. Presently they are heading up the coast, 
through white-streaked, salt-smelling Baltic. 

“Well. Where we going, fellas?” jovial Slothrop wants 
to know. 

Narrisch stares. “That is the isle of Usedom,” von Goll 
explains, gently. “It is bounded on one side by the Baltic 
Sea. It is also bounded by two rivers. Their names are the 
Swine, and the Peene. We were just on the Swine River. 
We were in Swinemiinde. Swinemiinde means ‘mouth of 
the Swine River.’” 

“All right, all right.” 

“We are headed around the island of Usedom, to a 
place that is at the mouth of the Peene River.” 

“Let’s see, so that would be called... wait... Peene- 
miinde, right?” 

“Very good.” 

~“SoP” There is a pause. “Oh. Oh, that Peenemiinde.” 

Narrisch, as it turns out, used to work up there. He’s 
apt to brood some at the idea of Russians occupying the 
place. 

“There was a liquid-oxygen plant I had my eye on, 
too,” Springer a little down with it himself, “I wanted to 
‘start a chain—werre still angling - for the one in Volken- 
Tode, at the old Goering Institute.” 

-“There’s a bunch of those LOX generators under Nord- 
Beaton,” Slothrop trying to be helpful. 

“Thanks, The Russians have that too, you'll recall. 


pis oe 


582 Gravity’s Rainsow 


That’s a problem: if it weren’t so against Nature I'd say 
they don’t know what they want. The roads heading east 
are jammed day and night with Russian lorries, full of 
materiel, All kinds of loot. But no clear pattern to it yet, 
beyond strip-it-and-pack-it-home.” 

“Jeepers,” clever Slothrop here, “do you reckon they’ve 
found that S-Gerdt yet, huh, Mr. von Géll?” 

“Ah, cute,” beams the Springer. 

“He’s an OSS man,” groans Narrisch, “tell you, we ought 
to rub him out.” 

“S-Gerat’s going for £10,000 these days, half of that in 
front. You interested?” 

“Nope. But I did hear at Nordhausen that you already 
have it.” 

“Wrong.” 

“Gerhardt—” 

‘“He’s all right, Klaus.” The look is one Slothrop’s had 
before, from auto salesmen signaling their partners got a 
real idiot here, Leonard, now don’t spook him please? “We 
planted the story deliberately in Stettin. Wanted to see how 
a Colonel Tchitcherine will respond.” 

“Fuck. Him again? He'll respond, all right.” 

“Well, that’s what we're going up to Peenemiinde today 
to find out.” 

“Oh, boy.” Slothrop goes on to tell about the run-in at 
Potsdam, and how Geli thought Tchitcherine didn’t care 
about Rocket hardware nearly so much as working out 
some plot against that Oberst Enzian. If the two marke- 
teers are interested, they don’t show it. 

The talk has drifted on into that kind of slack, nam 
recapitulating that Slothrop’s mother Nalline loved to float 
away on in the afternoons—Helen Trent, Stella Dallas, 
Mary Noble Backstage Wife. ... 

“Tchitcherine is a complex man. It’s almost as if...he 
thinks of Enzian as... another part of him—a black ver-— 
sion of something inside himself. A something he needs to — 
.. . liquidate.” | 

NArriscH: Do you think there might be some... some 
political reason? tagcat | 

von G6tx (shaking his head): I just don’t know, Klaus. 
Ever since what happened in Central Asia— se 

NArriscH: You mean— ; 


In the Zone 583 


von G6.u: Yes...the Kirghiz Light. You know, it’s 
-funny—he’s never wanted to be thought of as an im- 
perialist— 
_ Narriscu: None of them do. But there’s the girl. ... 

' von GOLL: Little Geli Tripping. The one who thinks 
she’s a witch. 

NArriscH: But do you really think she means to go 
through with this—this plan of hers, to find Tchitcherine? 

von GOuL: I think... They...do.... 

NArriscH: But Gerhardt, she is in love with him— 

von G6xii: He hasn’t been dating her, has he? 

NArriscH: You can’t be implying— 

_ “Say,” splutters Slothrop, “what th’ heck’re you guys 
talkin’ about, anyway?” 

“Paranoia,” Springer snaps reproachfully (as folks will 
snap when interrupted at a game they enjoy). “You 
wouldn’t understand that.” 

“Well excuse me, got to go vomit now,” a klassic kome- 
back among charm-school washouts like our Tactful 
Tyrone here, and pretty advanced stuff on dry land, but 
not out here, where the Baltic is making it impossible not 
to be seasick. Chimps are all doing their vomiting hud- 
dled under a tarp. Slothrop joins at the rail a miserable 
lot of musicians and girls, They instruct him in fine points 
such as not vomiting into the wind, and timing it for when 
the ship rolls toward the sea, Frau Gnahb having expressed 
the hope that no one would get any vomit on her ship with 

the. kind of glacial smile Dr. Mabuse used to get, espe- 
cially on a good day. She can be heard in the pilot house 
now, bellowing her sea chanty, “666666,” goes Slothrop 
over the side. 

And this is how their desperate enterprise goes a-rollick- 
ing up the coast of Usedom, under a hazy summer sky. On 
shore, the green downs roll up in two gentle steps: above 
them is a chain of hills thick with pines and oaks. Little 
resort towns with white beaches and forlorn jetties wheel 
abeam rheumatically slow. Military-looking craft, probably 
Russian PT boats, will be seen now and then lying dead in 
the water. None challenge the Frau’s passage. The sun is 
‘in and out, turning the decks a stark moment’s yellow 
around everyone’s shadow. There’s a late time of day when 


all shadows are thrown along the same east-northeast bear- 
ns i 


7 


ae 


584 Gravitys Ramsow 


ing as the test rockets were always fired out to sea from 
Peenemiinde. The exact clock time, which varies through 
the year, is known as Rocket Noon... and the sound that 
must at that moment fill the air for its devout can only be 
compared with a noontime siren the whole town believes 
in... and guts resonate, hard as stone.... 

Before you sight it, you can féel the place. Even draped 
over a gunwale, cheek against a fender smelling of tar, eyes 
tearing and insides sloshing as the sea, Even barren and 
scorched as Rossokovsky and the White Russian Army left 
it in the spring. It’s a face. On the maps, it’s a skull or a 
corroded face-in profile, facing southwest: a small marshy 
lake for the eye-socket, nose-and-mouth cavity cutting in 
at the entrance to the Peene, just below the power station 
...the draftsmanship is a little like a Wilhelm Busch 
cartoon face, some old fool for mischievous boys to play 
tricks on. Tapping his tanks for grain alcohol, scratching 
great naughty words across fields of his fresh cement, or 
even sneaking in to set off a rocket in the middle of the 
night.... 

Low, burned-out buildings now, ash images of camou- 
flage nets burned onto the concrete (they had only a min- 
ute to glow, like a biirger’s silk mantle—to light this 
coastal indoors, this engineers’ parlor full of stodgy shapes 
and neutral tones... didn’t it only flare? no need to put 
right, nothing monitory, no new levels to be reached... 
but who would that be, watching so civil and mild over 
the modeltop? face all in these chromo sunset colors, eyes 
- inside blackrim lenses which, like the flaring nets, now are 
seen to have served as camouflage for who but the Bicycle 
Rider in the Sky, the black and fatal Edwardian silhouette 
on the luminous breast of sky, of today’s Rocket Noon, 
two circular explosions inside the rush hour, in the death- 
scene of the sky’s light. How the rider twirls up there, 
terminal and serene. In the Tarot he is known as The Fool, 
but around the Zone here they call him Slick. It’s 1945. 
Still early, still innocent. Some of it is). 

Charred helpless latticework: what was wooden now. 
only settles, without strength. Green human shapes flash in 
the ruins. The scale is very confusing, along here. The 
troops look larger than they should. A zoo? a shooting 
gallery? Why, some of both. Frau Gnahb wallows in closer 


In the Zone 585 


to land, proceeds up the marshy shoreline at half speed. 
Signs of occupation increase: lorry-parks, tents, a corral 
teeming with horses pied, sorrel, snow-white, red as blood. 
Wild summer ducks up exploding, wet and showery, out 
of green reeds—they swing aft over the boat and descend 
in its wake, where they bob quacking in two-foot excur- 
sions. High in the sunlight, a white-tailed eagle is soaring. 
Smoothlipped bomb and shell craters hold blue sea water. 
Barracks have had their roofs blown away: spinal and rib- 
wise and sunwhite the bones of these creatures that must 
have held in their time half the Jonahs of falling Europe. 
But trees, beech and pine, have begun to grow in again 
where spaces were cleared and leveled for housing -or 
offices—up through cracks in the pavement, everywhere 
life may gain purchase, up rushes green summer ’45, and 
the forests are still growing dense on the upland. 
Passing now the great blackened remains of the De- 
velopment Works, most of it strewn at ground level. In 
series, some ripped and broken, others largely hidden by 
the dunes, Narrisch reverently telling them one by one, 
come the concrete masses of the test stands, stations of the 
cross, VI, V, III; IV, I, IX, VIII, I, finally the Rocket’s 
Own, from which it stood and flew at last, VII and X. 
Trees that once screened these from the sea now are only 
stalks of charcoal. 

Pulling around the northern curve of the peninsula, test- 
stand wall and earthworks receding—moving now past 
\Peenemiinde-West, the Luftwaffe’s old territory. Far away 
to starboard, the cliffs of the Greifswalder Oie shimmer 
through the blue haze. Concrete launching-ramps used to 
test the V-1 or buzzbomb point at the sea. Runways 
pocked with craters, heaped with rubble and: wrecked 
Messerschmitts swing by, down the peninsula: over the 
skull’s arc, south again toward the Peene, there—above the 
tolling hills, miles off the port bow, the red brick tower 
of the cathedral in Wolgast, and closer in the half-dozen 
stacks of the power station, smokeless over Peenemiinde, 
have survived the lethal compression-loads of March. ... 
White swans drift in the reeds, and pheasants fly over the 
tall pines inland. A truck motor snarls somewhere into life, 
_ Frau Gnahb brings her boat around in a tight turn, 
through an inlet, to the dock. The summer calm lies over 


4 


o 
= 
Td 7 _ 


586 Gravisy’s Rainsow 


everything: rolling-stock inert on its tracks, one soldier 
sitting against an orange-topped oil drum trying to play 
an accordion. Maybe only fooling around. Otto lets go of 
his chorus girl’s hand. His mother cuts the engines, and he 
steps broadly to the dock and jogs along, making fast. 
Then there’s a brief pause: Diesel fumes, marsh birds, 
quiet idleness. ... 

Somebody’s staff car, racketing around the corner of a 
cargo shed, slides to a stop, bouncing forth out of its rear 
door a major even fatter than Duane Marvy, but with a 
kindlier and dimly Oriental face. Gray hair like sheep’s 
wool comes twisting down all around his head. “Ah! von 
Golll” arms outstretched, wrinkled eyes shiny with—is it 
real tearsP “von Goll, my dear friend!” 

“Major Zhdaev,” Springer nods ambling over the brow, 
as behind the major now this truckload of troops in fatigues 
seems to be pulling up here, kind of odd they should be 
toting those submachine guns and carbines just for some 
stevedoring. ... 

Right. Before anyone can move, they've leaped out and 
made a cordon around Zhdaev and the Springer, pieces at 
the ready. “Do not be alarmed,” Zhdaev waving and beam- 
ing, strolling backward to the car. with his arm around 
the Springer, “we are detaining your friend for a bit. You 
may proceed with your work and go. We'll see that he 
gets safely back to Swinemiinde.” 

“What the devil,” Frau Gnahb comes growling out of 
the pilot house. Haftung shows up, twitching, putting 
hands in various pockets and taking them out again: “Who 
are they arresting? What about my contract? Will anything 
happen to us?” The staff car pulls away. Enlisted men 
begin filing on board. 

“Shit,” ponders Narrisch. ; 

“You think it’s a bust?” 

“T think Tchitcherine is responding with interest. Just as 
you said.” 

“Aw, now—” ‘ ' 

“No, no,” hand on sleeve, “he’s right. You’re harmless.” | 

“Thanks.” ‘s sf L ue | 

“I warned him, but he laughed. ‘Another leap, Narrisch. 
I have to keep leaping, don’t IP’ ” pai 

“Well what do you want to-do now, cut him loose?” 

There is some excitement amidships. The Russians have | 


In the Zone 587 


_ thrown back a tarp to reveal the chimps, who are covered 
with vomit, and have also broken into the vodka. Haftung 
blinks and shudders. Wolfgang is on his back, sucking at a 
gurgling bottle he is clutching with his feet. Some of the 
chimps are docile, others are looking for a fight. 

“Somehow ...” Slothrop does wish the man would quit 
talking this way, “I owe him—that much.” 

“Well I don't,” Slothrop dodging a sudden plume of 
yellow chimpanzee vomit. “He ought to be able to take 
care of himself.” 

“His talk’s grandiose enough. But he’s not paranoid in 
his heart—in this line of work, that’s a disaster.” 

One of the chimps now bites a Soviet corporal in the 
leg. The corporal screams, unslinging his Tokarev and 
firing from the hip, by which time the chimp has leaped 
for a halyard. A dozen more of the critters, many carrying 
vodka bottles, head en: masse for the gangplank. “Don’t 
let them get away,” Haftung hollers. The trombone player 
sticks his head sleepily out a hatch to ask what’s happen- 
ing and has his face walked over by three sets of pink- 
soled feet before grasping the situation. Girls, spangles 
aflame in the afternoon sun, feathers all quivering, are 
being chased forward and aft by drooling Red Army person- 
nel. Frau Gnahb pulls on her steam whistle, thereby spook- 
ing the rest of the chimps, who join the stampede to 
shore. “Catch them,” Haftung pleads, “somebody.” Slo- 
throp finds himself between Otto and Narrisch, being 
pushed ashore over the brow by soldiers chasing after 
chimps or girls, or trying to wrangle the cargo ashore. 
Among splashes, cursing, and girlish shrieks from the other 
side of the boat, chorus girls and musicians keep appear- 

_ing and wandering back and forth. It is difficult to per- 

ceive just what the fuck is happening here. 

“Listen.” Frau Gnahb leaning over the side. 

Slothrop notices a canny squint. “You have a plan.” 

“You want to pull a diversionary feint.” 

“What? What?” 

“Chimps, musicians, dancing girls. Decoys all over. 
While the three of you sneak in and grab Der Springer.” 

“We can hide,” Narrisch looking around gangster-eyed. 
“Nobody'll notice. Ja, jal! The boat can take off, as if we 
‘were on board!” 

, “Not me,” sez Slothrop. 


¢ 


Bi, 


1 5 z ~y 
f = q 


» 


588 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


“Hal Hal” sez Frau Gnahb. 

“Ha! Hal” sez Narrisch. 

“Til lie to at the northeast corner,” this madmother con- 
tinues, “in the channel between the little island and that 
triangular part that’s built up on the foreshore.” 

“Test Stand X.” 

“Catchy name. I think here’ll be enough of a tide by 
then, Light a fire. Otto! Cast me off now.” 

“Zu Befehl, Muttil” 

Slothrop and Narrisch go dash behind a cargo shed, find 
a boxcar, and hide inside. Nobody notices. Chimps are 
running by in several directions. The soldiers chasing them 
seem by now to be really pissed off. Someplace the clari- 
net player is blowing scales on his instrument. The boat’s 
motor sputters up into a growl, and screws go churning 
away. A while later, Otto and his girl come climb in the 
boxcar, out of breath. 


“Well, Narrisch,” Slothrop might as well ask, “where’d — 


they take him, do you think? eh?” 

“From what I could see, Block Four and that whole 
complex to the south were deserted. My guess is the as- 
sembly building near Test Stand VII. Under that big 
ellipse. There are underground tunnels and rooms—ideal 
for a headquarters. Looks like most of it survived pretty 
well, even though Rossokovsky had orders to level the 

lace.” 
a “You got a piece?” Narrisch shakes his head no. “Me 
neither. What kind of a black-market operator are you, 
anyway? no piece.” r 


“I used to be in inertial guidance. You expect me to 


revert?” 
“W-well what are we supposed to use, then? Our wits?” _ 
Out the slats of the car, the sky is darkening, the clouds 

turning orange, tangerine, tropical. Otto and his girl are 


murmuring in one comer. “Scrub that one,” Narrisch with © 


sour mouth. “Five minutes away from his mother, he’s a — 


Casanova.” ) 

Otto is earnestly explaining his views jon the Mother 
Conspiracy. It’s not often a sympathetic |girl will listen. — 
The Mothers get together once a year, in'secret, at these 
giant conventions, and exchange information. Recipes, 


games, key phrases to use on their children, “What did ; 


a | 
ca 


frst ie ms 


| ae 


In the Zone 589 


yours use to say when she wanted to make you feel 
““Tve worked my fingers to the bone!’ ” sez the girl. 

“Right! And she used to cook those horrible casseroles, 
w-with the potatoes, and onions—” 

“And ham! Little piece of ham—” 

“You see, you see? That can’t be accidental!.They have 
a contest, for Mother of the Year, breast-feeding, diaper- 
changing, they time them, casserole competitions, ja—then, 
toward the end, they actually begin to use the children. 
The State Prosecutor comes out on stage. ‘In a moment, 
Albrecht, we are going to’ bring your mother on. Here is a 
Luger, fully loaded. The State will guarantee you absolute 


_ immunity from prosecution. Do whatever you wish to do— 


anything at all. Good luck, my boy.’ The pistols are loaded 
with blanks, natiirlich, but the unfortunate child does not 
know this. Only the mothers who get shot at qualify for 
the finals. Here they bring in psychiatrists, and judges sit 
with stopwatches to see how quickly the children will 
crack, ‘Now then, Olga, wasn’t it nice of Mutti to break up 
your affair with that long-haired poet?” “We understand 
your mother and you are, ah, quite close, Hermann. Re- 
member the time she caught you masturbating into her 
glove? Eh?’ Hospital attendants stand by to drag. the 
children off, drooling, screaming, having clonic convul- 
sions. Finally there is only one Mother left on stage. They 
put the traditional flowered hat on her head, and hand her 


_ the orb and scepter, which in this case are a gilded pot 


9 


roast and a whip, and the orchestra plays Tristan und 
Isolde.’ 


O 


They come out into the last of the twilight. Just a sleepy 


summer evening in Peenemiinde. A flight of ducks passes 
overhead, going west. No Russians around. A single bulb 
burns over the entrance to the cargo shed. Otto and his 


girl wander hand in hand along the dock. An ape comes 
“scampering up to take Otto’s free hand. To north and 


south the Baltic keeps unrolling low white waves. “What’s 
appening,” asks the clarinet player. “Have a banana,” 


590 Gravity’s Rainsow 


tuba player with his mouth full has a good-sized bunch 
stowed in the bell of his ax. 

Night is down by the time they get started. They head 
inland, Springer’s crashout party, along the railroad tracks. 
Pine trees tower to either side of the cinder embankment. 
Ahead fat pinto rabbits scurry, only their white patches 
visible, no reason to suppose rabbits is what they are. 
‘Otto’s friend Hilde comes gracefully down out of the 
woods with his cap that she’s filled to the brim with round 
berries, dusty blue, sweet. The musicians are packing 
vodka bottles in every available pocket. That’s tonight’s 
meal, and Hilde kneeling alone at the berry bushes: has 
whispered grace for them all. In the marshes now you can 
hear the first peepers start up, and the high-frequency 
squeals of a bat out hunting, and some wind in the upper 
trees. Also, from farther away, a shot or two. 

“Are they firing at my apes?” Haftung chatters. “That’s 
2000 marks apiece. How am I ever going to get that back?” 

A family of mice go dashing across the tracks, and right 
over Slothrop’s feet. “I was expecting just a big cemetery. 
I guess not.” 

“When we came we only cleared out what we needed 
to,” Narrisch recalls. “Most of it. stayed—the forest, the 
life...there are probably still deer up in there, some- 
place. Big fellows with dark antlers. And the birds— 
snipes, coots, wild geese—the noise from the testing drove 
them out to sea, but they'd always come back in when it 
was quiet again.” 

’ Before they reach even the airfield they have to scatte: 
twice into the woods, first for a security patrol, then for a 
steam-engine come puffing up from Peenemiinde-East, its 
headlight cutting through a fine night-haze, some troops 
with automatics hanging on to steps and ladders. Steel 
grinding and creaking by in the night, the men shooting 


the breeze as they pass, no feeling of tension to it. “They — 


might be after us anyway,” Narrisch whispers, “Come on.” 

Through a patch of woods, and then cautiously out onto 
the open airfield. A sharp sickle of moon has risen, Apes 
scuttle along in the bonelight, arms dangling. It’s a ner- 
vous passage. Everybody’s a perfect target, there’s no cover 
except for airplanes strafed where they stood into relics— 


rusted stringers, burned paint, gullwings driven back into © 


the earth. Lights from the old Luftwaffe complex glow to 


a 


In the Zone 591 


the south. Trucks purr now and then along the road at the 
far edge of the airfield. There’s singing from the barracks, 
and someplace a radio. The evening news from some- 
where. Too far to hear the words or even the language, 
only the studious monotone: the news, Slothrop, going on 
without you.... 

They make it across the tarmac to the road, and crouch 
in a drainage ditch, listening for traffic. Suddenly, to their 
left, yellow runway lights come on, a double row of them 
chaining to the sea, brightness bouncing up and down a 
couple-three times before it settles in. “Somebody coming 
in,” Slothrop guesses. 

c “More likely going out,” snaps Narrisch. “We'd better 
uITy. 

Back in the pine woods now, heading up a road of 
packed dirt toward Test Stand VII, they start to pick up 
stray girls and chimpanzees. Pine smells wrap them: old 
needles lie at the margins of the road. Downhill, lights 
appear as the trees begin thinning out, then the test-stand 
area comes in view. The assembly building is something 
like a hundred feet high—it blocks out the stars. There’s 
a tall bright band where sliding doors are open, and light 
scatters outside. Narrisch grabs Slothrop’s arm. “It looks 
like the major’s car. And the motor’s running.” Lotta 
searchlights, too, set up on fences topped with barbed 
wire—also what look like a division of security roaming 
around. 

“Guess this is it,” Slothrop a little nervous. 

“Ssh.” Sound of a plane, a single-engine fighter, circling 
to make its approach low over the pines. “Not much time.” 
Narrisch gathers the others around and issues his orders. 
Girls are to go in from the front, singing, dancing, vamp- 
ing the woman-hungry barbarians. Otto will try to knock 
out the car, Haftung will get everybody rounded up and 
ready to rendezvous with the boat. 

“Tits ’n’ ass,” mutter the girls, “tits ’n’ ass. That’s all we 
are around here.” 

“Ah, shaddap,” snarls G. M. B. Haftung, which is his 
usual way of dealing with the help. 

“Meanwhile,” continues Narrisch, “Slothrop and I will 
go in after Springer. When we have him, we'll try to get 

them to shoot. That will be your signal to run like hell.” 

“Oh, definitely some shooting,” sez Slothrop, “a-and how 


592 Gravity’s RaInBow 


about this?” He has just had a brilliant idea: fake Molotov 
cocktails, a switch on Siure Bummer’s old routine. He 
holds up a vodka bottle, pointing and grinning. 

“But that stuff won’t even hardly burn.” 

“But they'll think it’s gasoline,’ beginning to pluck 
ostrich feathers from the costume of the nearest girl. “And 
just imagine how secure it will make us feel.” 

“Felix,” the clarinet player asks the tuba player, “what 
have we fallen among?” Felix is eating a banana, and 
living for the moment. Presently he has wandered off in 
the woods with the rest of the band, where they can be 
heard moving around in circles, tootling and blatting at 
each other. Hilde and Slothrop are making Phony Phire- 
bombs, the other girls have taken off, Zitz und Arsch, 
downslope. 

“So we'll present a plausible threat,” Narrisch whispers, 
“we'll need matches. Who’s got matches?” 

“Not me.” 

“Me either.” 

“Gee, my lighter’s out of flints.” 

“Kot,” Narrisch throwing up his hands, “Kot,” walking 
off into the trees, where he collides with Felix and his 
tuba. “You don’t have any matches either.” 

“I have a Zippo,” replies Felix, “and two Corona Coro- 
nas, from the American officers’ club in—” 

A minute later, Narrisch and Slothrop, hands each 
cupped around the coal of one Havana’s finest, are sneaky- 
Peteing like two cats in a cartoon off toward Test Stand 
VII, with vodka-bottle bombs stuck in their belts and 
ostrich-feather wicks trailing behind in the sea breeze. The 
plan is to climb the pine-topped sand-and-scrub embank- 
ment around the test stand, and come in on the Assembly — 
Building from behind. 


Now Narrisch here’s a guidance man, a guidance man ~ 


is he. And evry day at Rocket Noon, there’s death, and 
revelry.... But Narrisch has managed, in his time, to 
avoid nearly all of it. 

In fact, no two people have been so ill-equipped to — 
approach a holy Center since the days of Tehitcherine and — 
Dzaqyp Qulan, hauling ass over the steppe, into the Nort, | 
to find their Kirghiz Light. That’s about ten years’ gap. — i 


Giving this cee about the same vulnerability to record- 


In the Zone 593 


breakers as baseball, a sport also well-spidered with white 
suggestions of the sinister. 

Holy-Center-Approaching is soon to be the number one 
Zonal pastime. Its balmy heyday is nearly on it. Soon more 
champions, adepts, magicians of all ranks and orders will 
be in the field than ever before in the history of the game. 
The sun will rule all enterprise, if it be honest and sport- 
ing. The Gauss curve will herniate toward the excellent. 

_ And tankers the likes of Narrisch and Slothrop here will 
have already been weeded out. 

Slothrop, as noted, at least as early as the Anubis era, 
has begun to thin, to scatter. “Personal density,” Kurt 
Mondaugen in his Peenemiinde office not too many steps 
away from here, enunciating the Law which will one day 
ae name, “is directly proportional to temporal band- 

- width. 

“Temporal bandwidth” is the width of your present, 
your now. It is the familiar “At” considered as a dependent 
variable. The more you dwell in the past and in the future, 
the thicker your bandwidth, the more solid your persona. 
But the narrower your sense of Now, the more tenuous 
you are. It may get to where you're having trouble remem- 
bering what you were doing five minutes ago, or even—as 
Slothrop now—what you're doing here, at the base of this 
colossal curved embankment. ... 

“Uh,” he tums slackmouth to Narrisch, “what are 

| we...” 

“What are we what?” 

“What?” 

“You said, “What are we...,’ then you stopped.” 
“Oh. Gee, that was a funny thing to say.” 

_As for Narrisch, he’s too locked in to business. He has 
never seen this great Ellipse any other way but the way 
he was meant to. Greta Erdmann, on the contrary, saw 
the rust-covered eminences here bow, exactly as they did 
once, in expectancy, faces hooded, smooth cowlings. of 
Nothing . . . each time Thanatz brought the whip down on 
- her skin, she was taken, off on another penetration toward 
the Center: each lash, a little farther in... till someday, 

she knows, she will have that first glimpse of it, and from 
_ then on it will be an absolute need, a ruling target... 
_wh-wh-wh-whack the boneblack trestling of water towers 


594 Gravity's Rarnsow 


above, bent to the great rim, visible above the trees in 
light that’s bleak and bruise-purple as Peenemiinde sun- 
sets in the chill slow firing-weather...a long look from 
the top of some known Low Country dike into a sky flow- 
ing so even and yellowed a brown that the sun could be 
anywhere behind it, and the crosses of the turning wind- 
mills could be spoke-blurs of the terrible Rider himself, 
Slothrop’s Rider, his two explosions up there, his celestial 
cyclist— 

No, but even That only flickers now briefly across a bit 
of Slothropian lobe-terrain, and melts into its surface, van- 
ishing. So here passes for him one more negligence... and 
likewise groweth his Preterition sure.... There is no good 
reason to hope for any turn, any surprise I-see-it, not from 
Slothrop. Here he is, scaling the walls of an honest cere- 
monial plexus, set down on a good enough vision of what’s 
shadowless noon and what isn’t. But oh, Egg the flying 
Rocket hatched from, navel of the 50-meter radio sky, all 
proper ghosts of place—forgive him his numbness, his 
glozing neutrality. Forgive the fist that doesn’t tighten in 
his chest, the heart that can’t stiffen in any greeting... . 
Forgive him as you forgave Tchitcherine at the Kirghiz 
Light. ... Better days are coming. 

Slothrop is listening to faraway peripatetic tuba and 
clarinet being joined in on now by trombone and tenor 
sax, trying to pick up a tune...and to the bursts of 


laughter from soldiers and girls...sounds like a party ~ 


down there...maybe even some stag dames... “Say, 
why don’t we, uh... what was your—” Narrisch, leather 
scarecrow, trying to ignore Slothrop’s behavior, has de- 


cided to dismantle his fire-bomb: he uncorks the vodka — 


and waves it under his nose before taking a belt. He 
beams, cyinical, salesmanwise, up at Slothrop. “Here.” A 
silence under thé white-wall.. ‘ 

“Oh, yes I was thinking it was gasoline, but thes it’s 
fake, so it’s really vodka, right?” 

But just over the embankment, down in the arena, what 
might that have been just now, waiting in this broken 
moonlight, camouflage paint from fins to point crazed into 
jigsaw...is it, then, really never to find you again? Not 


even in your worst times of night, with pencil words on — 


your page only At from the things they stand for? And in- 


In the Zone 595 


side the victim is twitching, fingering beads, touching 
wood, avoiding any Operational Word. Will it really never 
come to take you, now? 

Near the water towers, they have started to climb, up 
toward the rim. Sand leaks into their shoes and hisses away 
down the slope. At the top, back through the trees, they 
get a quick look at the lighted runway, the fighter now 
landed, surrounded by groundcrew shadows fueling, ser- 

_ vicing, turning her around. Down the penninsula lights glow 
in patches, curves, zigzags, but over on this side, from the 
old Development Works south, it’s pitch black. 

They push through pine branches and down again, into 
the Egg, sacked of its German hardware, long converted to 
a Russian motor pool. The corner of the huge Assembly 

Building, as they come down, rises to face them across a 
hundred yards of jeeps and lorries. Down to the right is a 
three- or four-level test frame with a round, kind of quon- 
set top, and underneath the frame is a long pit shaped like 
a shallow V. “Cooling duct,” according to Narrisch. 
ee ie probably under there. We have to go in through 

ere. 

They have come halfway down the slope to a pump 
house, built into the earthworks, for the cold water that 
used to carry off the tremendous heat from the test firings. 
It is stripped now, hollow and dark inside. Slothrop isn’t 
two steps over the doorsill when he walks into somebody. 

“Beg your pardon,” though it comes out less than 


y. . 
“Oh, that’s all right.” Russian accent. “I don’t mind at 
all.” He backs Slothrop outside again, oh, a mean looking 
junior sergeant here about 8 or g feet high. 

“Well, now—” at which point Narrisch comes walking 
into them. 

“Oh.” Narrisch blinks at the sentry. “Sergeant, don’t you 
hear that music? Why aren’t you back at the Assembly 
Building, with your comrades? There are, I understand, a 
number of eager frauleins entertaining them,” nudge 
nudge, “in a most enchanting state of deshabille, too.” 

__ “T suppose that’s all perfectly divine,” replies the sentry, 
“for some people.” . 

_. “Kot...” So much for tactics. 

_. “And besides, this is out of bounds, you big sillies.” 


u 


596 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


Sighing. Narrisch raises his bottle aloft, brings it down, 
or up, thunk on the sentry’s nape, dislodging the man’s 
helmet liner, is what happens. “Naughty,” the Russian, 
somewhat nettled, stoops to retrieve his headgear. “Really 
I ought to put you both under apprehension.” 

“Enough chit-chat,” snarles Slothrop, brandishing his 
glowing cigar and “Molotov cocktail.” “Hand over that gun 
there, Ivan, or I turn you into a human flare!” 

“You're mean,” sulks the sentry, unslinging his Deg- 
tyarov a little too quickly—Slothrop dodges aside, aims his 
usual swift kick to the groin, which misses, but does knock 
loose the weapon, which Narrisch is thoughtful enough to 
dive for. “Beasts,” whimpers the Russian, “oh, nasty, aw- 
ful . . .” scampering off into the night. 

“Two minutes,” Narrisch already inside the pump house. 
Slothrop grabs the automatic from him and follows at a 
run, accelerating down a sloping corridor. Their feet ring 
faster, sharper, on the concrete, down to a metal door: 
behind it they can hear Springer singing and babbling like 
a drunk. Slothrop pushes off his safety and Narrisch goes 
busting in. A pretty blonde auxiliary in black boots and 
steel-rimmed glasses is sitting here taking down shorthand 
notes of everything she hears from Springer, who leans 
happily grandiose against a cold-water pipe four feet high 
that runs the length of the room. 

“Drop that pencil,” orders Slothrop. “All right, where's 
that Major Zhdaev?” 

“He’s in conference. If you’d care to leave your name—” 

“Dope,” Narrisch screams, “they have given him some 
kind of dope! Gerhardt, Gerhardt, speak to me!” 

Slothrop recognizes the symptoms. ii ode that Sodium 
Amytal. It’s O.K. Let’s go.” 

“I expect the Major to be back any moment. They’re 
upstairs in the guardroom, smoking. Is there a number 
where he can reach you?” 

Slothrop has: slid under one of Springer’s arms, Narrisch 
under the other, when there’s this loud hammering on the 
door. 

“Smoking? Smoking what?” ) 

“This way, Slothrop.” 

“Oh.” They hustle Springer out another door, which 

Slothrop bolts and wrassles a heavy’ filing ‘cabinet up 


In the Zone 597 


against, then they drag Springer up a flight of steps into 
a long, straight corridor, lit by six or seven bulbs, the 
spaces between which are very dark. Along either side, 
floor to ceiling, run thick bundles of measurement cabling. 

“We're done for,” Narrisch wheezes. It’s 150 yards to 
the measurement bunker, and no cover but the shadows 
between the bulbs. All these birds gotta do is spray a 
pattern. 

“She baffs at nothing, the heterospeed,” cries Gerhardt 
von Goll. r 

“Try to walk,” Slothrop scared shit, “come on, man, it’s 
our ass!” Smashing echoes after them down the tunnel. A 
mufied burst of automtic fire. And another. All at once, 
two faint pools of light ahead, Zhdaev materializes, on the 
way back to his office. He has a friend with him, who 
smiles when he sees Slothrop 40 yards away, a big steel 
smile. Slothrop lets go of Springer and runs up into the 
next light, piece at the ready. The Russians are blinking at 
him in a puzzled way. “Tchitcherine! Hey.” 

They stand facing, each at his lit circle. Slothrop recalls 
that he has the drop on them. He smiles in half-apology, 
tips the muzzle at them, moves closer. Zhdaev and Tchi- 
tcherine, after a discussion which seems unnecessarily long, 
decide they will raise their hands. 

“Rocketman!” 

“How dy. ”? 

“What are you doing in a Fascist uniform like that?” 
“You're right. Think I'll join the Red Army, instead.” 
Narrisch leaves Springer sagging against a row of sleek 
rubber and silver-mesh cables, and comes up to help dis- 
arm the two Russians. Troops back down the tunnel are 

still busy busting the door down. 

“You guys want to undress, here? Say Tchitcherine, 
howd you like that hashish, by the way?” 

“Well,” taking off his trousers, “we were all up there in 
the budka just now smoking some... Rocketman, your 
timing is fantastic. Zhdaev, isn’t he something?” 

Slothrop slides out of his tux. “Just see you don’t geta | 

_hardon here now, fella.” 

“Tm serious. It’s your Schwarzphinomen.” 

“Quit fooling.” 
~ “You don’t even know about it. It choreographs you. 


598 Gravity’s RaInsow 


Mine’s always trying to destroy me. We should be ex- 
changing those, instead of uniforms.” 

The disguise business grows complicated. Zhdaev’s 
jacket with the gold-starred pogoni on the shoulders gets 
draped around the Springer, who is now humming every- 
one a Kurt Weill medley. Zhdaev puts on Springer’s white 
suit, and then him and Tchitcherine get tied up with their 
own belts, a-and neckties. “Now—the idea,” Slothrop ex- 
plains, “being that you, Tchitcherine, will be posing as me, 
and the major there—” At which point the door back 
down the tunnel comes blasting open, two figures with 
wicked Suomi subs, drums on them as big as that Gene 
Krupa’s, come flying through. Slothrop stands in the light 
in Tchitcherine’s uniform, and waves dramatically, pointing 
at the two hogtied officers. “Make it good,” he mutters to 
Tchitcherine, “I’m trusting you now, but look out I have 
a great passive vocabulary, I'll know what you're saying.” 

It’s O.K. with Tchitcherine, but confusing. “I'm sup- 
posed to be who, now?” 

“Oh, shit... look, just tell them to go check out the 
pump house up there, it’s urgent.” Slothrop gestures and 
lip-synchs while Tchitcherine talks. It seems to work. The 
two actually salute, and go back through the door they 
just shot down. 

“Those apes,” Tchitcherine shakes his head. “Those 
black apes! How did you know, Rocketman? Of course 
you didn’t, but the Schwarzphinomen did. A great touch. 
Two of them, looking at me through the window. And I 
thought—well, you know: I thought fit about what you 
thought Id think. . 

But by this time Slothrop i is way ak of earshot. Springer 
by now is able to stumble at a fast walk. They get as far 
as the measurement bunker without running into anybody. 
Out a door of bulletproof glass, behind their own reflec- 
tions, is the old test frame, windows broken out, camou- 
flage in German Expressionist ripples streaming eray and 
black all over it. The two soldiers are sure enough up 
there poking around that pump house, fi fhding nothing. 


Presently they disappear inside again, and Narrisch opens ~ 


the door. “Hurry.” They edge outside, into the arena. 
It takes a while to get back up the slope and into the 
woods. Otto and Hilde show up. They've finessed Zhdaev’s 


car and driver out of a rotor arm. So there are four of i 


ee 


In the Zone 599 


them now to try and lift warbling payload Gerhardt von 
Goll up these few crummy feet of sand embankment here, 
gotta be the most ill-designed propulsion system this test 

_ stand has seen in a while. Otto and Hilde tug at Springer’s 
arms, Narrisch and Slothrop push from the ass end. About 
halfway up Springer blows a tremendous fart that echoes 
for minutes across the historic ellipse, like now to do for 
you folks my anal impression of the A4.... 

“Oh, fuck you,” Slothrop snarls. 

“An erect green steed of planetoid and bone,” nods the 
Springer in reply. 

Music and chatter back by the Assembly Building have 
all died away now, and an unpleasant calm has replaced 
them. Up over the top at last and into the woods, where 

_ Springer rests his forehead against a tree trunk and com- 

_ Inences vomiting violently. 

“Narrisch, we're risking our ass for this slobP” 

__ But Narrisch is busy helping squeeze his friend’s stom- 
ach. “Gerhardt, are you all right? What can I do?” 

“Beautiful,” chokes Springer, vomit trickling down his 
chin. “Ahh. Feels great!” 

Along come chimps, musicians, dancing girls. Drifting 
in to rendezvous, Over the last dune and down to the 

packed cinder triangle of Test Stand X, and the sea. The 
musicians for a while play a kind of march tune. Past the 
foreshore, the tide has left them a strip of sand. But Frau 
Gnahb is nowhere in sight. Haftung is holding hands with 
an ape. Felix shakes spit out of his tuba. A honey-haired 
chorus girl, whose name he never does get, piss her arms 
around Slothrop. “Tm scared.” 

“Me too.” He hugs her. 

» All hell breaks loose—sirens whoop-whooping, search- 
lights starting to probe the woods up above, truck motors 
and shouted commands. The crashout party move off the 
cinders, and crouch in marsh grass. 

“We've collected one automatic and two sidearms,” 
Narrisch whispers. “Theyll be coming at us from the 
south. It'll only take one of us to go back up and hold 
them.” He nods and begins checking his hardware. 

via “You're crazy,” hisses Slothrop, “theyll kill you.” Com- 
motion now from over by Test Stand VII, Headlights are 
appearing, one after another, along the road up there. 

', Narrisch taps Springer on the chin. It isn’t clear if 


600 Gravity's Ramnsow 


Springer knows who he is. “Lebe wohl,” anyway, Springer. 
... Nagants stuck in overcoat pockets, automatic cradled 
in his arms, Narrisch takes off at a crouching run along 
the beach, and doesn’t look back. 

“Where’s the boat?” Haftung in a white panic. Ducks, 
alarmed, are quacking at each other down here. Wind 
moves in the grass. When. searchlights move by, pine 
trunks uphill flare, deeply shining, terrible...and at 
everyone's back, the Baltic shakes and streams. 

Shots from uphill—then, maybe from Narrisch in reply, 
a burst of automatic fire. Otto is holding his Hilde close. 
“Anybody read Morse Code?” the girl next to Slothrop 
wants to know, “because there’s been a light going over 
there, see, at the tip of that little island? for a few min- 
utes now.” It’s three dots, dot, dot, three more dots. Over 
and over. 

“Hmm, SEES,” ponders Felix. 

“Maybe they’re not dots,” sez the tenor-sax player, 
“maybe they’re dashes.” 

“That’s funny,” sez Otto, “that would spell OTTO.” 

“That’s your name,” sez Hilde. ~ 

“Mother!” screams Otto, running out in the water and 
waving at the blinking light. Felix commences booming 
tuba notes across the water, and the rest of the band joins 
in. Reed shadows come stabbing across the sand, as the 
spotlights swoop down. A boat engine roars into hearing. 
“Here she comes,” Otto jumping up and down in the 
marsh. 

“Hey, Narrisch,” Slothrop squinting, trying to find him 
back there in light that was always too weak, “come on. 
Fall back.” No answer. But more shooting. 

Running-lights off, the boat comes barreling in at flank 
speed, Frau Gnahb has decided to ram Peenemiinde? no, 
now she puts everything full astermn—bearings shriek, 
screw-foam geysers, the boat slews around to a stop. 

“Get on board,” she bellows. : 

Slothrop’s been hollering for Narrisch. Frau Gnahb 
leans on her steam-whistle. But no answer. “Shit, I've got to 
get him—” Felix and Otto grab Slothrop from behind, 
drag him back to the boat kicking and cursing. “They'll kill 
him, you assholes, lemme go—” Dark shapes come spilling 
over the dune between here and Test Stand VII, orange 


In the Zone 601 


flickers at their midsections, the sound of rifle fire follow- 
ing a second later. 

“They will kill us.” Otto heaves Slothrop over the side, 
and tumbles in after. Spotlights find and skewer them now. 
The firing is louder—nipples and spatters in the water, 
slugs hammering into the boat. 

“Everybody here?” the Frau’s fangs bared in a grin. 
“Fine, fine!” A last ape reaches up, Haftung catches his 
hands, and he dangles, feet in the water, for several yards 
as they light out, all ahead full, till he can finally clamber 
up and over. Gunfire follows out to sea, out of range, at 
last out of earshot. 

“Hey Felix,” sez the tenor sax player, “you think there’s 
any gigs in Swinemiinde?” 


John Dillinger, at the end, found a few seconds’ strange 
mercy in the movie images that hadn’t quite yet faded 
from his eyeballs—Clark Gable going off unregenerate to 
fry in the chair, voices gentle out of the deathrow steel 
so long, Blackie...turning down a reprieve from his 
longtime friend now Governor of New York William 
Powell, skinny chinless condescending jerk, Gable just 
wanting to get it over with, “Die like ya live—all of a 
sudden, don’t drag it out—” even as bitchy little Melvin 
Purvis, staked outside the Biograph Theatre, lit up the 
fatal cigar and felt already between his lips the penis of 
official commendation—and federal cowards at the signal 
took Dillinger with their faggots’ precision... there was 
still for the doomed man some shift of personality in 
effect—the way you've felt for a little while afterward in 

‘the real muscles of your face and voice, that you were 
Gable, the ironic eyebrows, the proud, shining, snakelike 
head—to help Dillinger through the bushwhacking, and a 
little easier into death. 
_ Narrisch now, huddled inside a broken few meters of 
concrete drainage pipe, after doubling back under the 
wall of Test Stand VII, bracing curled now in the smell of 
old storm water, trying not to breathe loud enough to 
‘smack echoes into any betrayal—Narrisch hasn’t been to 
movi since Der Mitide Tod. That’s so long ago he’s 
en its ending, the last Rilke-elegiac shot of weary 
= leading the two lovers away hand in hand through 
oe he 


602 Gravity's RaInsow 


the forget-me-nots. No help at all from that quarter. To- 
night Narrisch is down to the last tommygun of his career, 
foreign and overheated... and blisters on his hands he 
won't have to worry about tomorrow. No sources of mercy 
available beyond the hard weapon, the burning fingers—a 
cruel way to go out for a good guidance man who always 
put in fair time for fair wages.... He had other offers 
...could’ve gone east with the Institute Rabe, or west to 
America and $6 a day—but Gerhardt von Géll promised 
him glamour, jackpots, a flashy dame on his arm, say, why 
not on both arms?—after poor linear Peenemiinde, who 
could blame him? 

It wasn’t ever necessary to see around the entire Plan... 
really that’s asking too much of anyone... not true? This 
S-Gerat strategy he’s going out of his way to die for to- 
night, what does he know of the Springer’s full intentions 
in the affair? It is reasonable to Narrisch that he, being 
smaller, he should be the sacrifice, if it helps Springer 
survive, even survive another day... wartime thinking, 
ja, ja... but too late to change..... 

Did the S-Gerat program at Nordhausen in its time ever 
hint that so many individuals, nations, firms, communities 
of interest would come after the factP Of course he was 
flattered then at being chosen to work on the modification 
to the guidance, minor as it was... hardly worth the spe- 
cial treatment ...-still, it was his first high historical mo- 
_ ment and he sourly figured it to be his last, up until meet- 
ing with Springer’s recruiting team, back during the rainier 
part of June.... Conferences in cafés and entrances to 
churchyards around Braunschweig (stucco arches, vines 
dripping onto thin collars) without an umbrella but with 
that light, belled hope inside—a field, crowded with lines 
of force, to expand, to fill, to keep him in good health and 
spirits... Berlin} The Chicago Cabaret! “Cocaine—or 
cards?” (an old movie line the gunsels loved to use that 
summer) ...the Big Time! 

But the ringing bright thing inside brought him here, 
instead: here, down in a pipe, to only a handful more of 
minutes. ... 

The idea was always to carry along a fixed quantity, A. 
Sometimes you’d use a Wien bridge, tuned to a certain 
frequency At, whistling, heavy with omen, inside the elec- 


In the Zone 603 


tric corridors... while outside, according to the tradition 
in these matters, somewhere a quantity B would be gath- 
ering, building, as the Rocket gathered speed. So, up till . 
assigned Brennschluss velocity, “v?,” electric-shocked as 
any rat into following this very narrow mazeway of clear 
space—yes, radio signals from the ground would enter the 
Rocket body, and by reflex—literally by electric signal 
traveling a reflex arc—the control surfaces twitch, to steer 
you back on course the instant you'd begin to wander off 
(how could you've kept from lapsing, up here, into that 
radiant inattention, so caught up in the wind, the sheer 
altitude...the unimaginable fires at your feet?) ...so, 
for that tightly steered passage, all was carried on in the 
sharpest, most painful anticipation, with B always grow- 
ing, as palpably cresting as the assault of tidal wave that 

ills every small creature and hones the air down to a 
cold stir. ... Your quantity A—shining, constant A, carried 
as they must have once packed far overland at night the 
Grail, in their oldtime and military bleakness of humor... 
and one morning a wide upper lip steelwool gray with the 
one. day’s growth, the fatal, the terrible sign, he shaved 
smooth every day, it meant that this was the Last Day— 
and, too, with only the grim sixth sense, as much faith as 
clear reception, that the B of Many Subscripts just over 
the electric horizon was really growing closer, perhaps this 
time as “Biy,” the precession angle of the gyro, moving 
invisibly but felt, terrifically arousing, over the metal frame 
toward angle Aj, (which is how they have set you the 
contacts: to close, you must see, at that exact angle). Or 
as “Bir,” another integrating, not of gyro rate but of the 
raw current flow itself, bled from the moving coil inside 
the poles, the “fettered” pendulum... they thought this 
way, Design Group, in terms of captivity, prohibition... 
there was an attitude toward one’s hardware more brutal 
and soldierly than. most engineers’ got the chance to 
be.... They felt quite the roughshod elite, Driwelling, 
and Schmeil, with the fluorescent lights shining on his 
bared forehead night after night.... Inside their brains 
they shared an old, old electro-decor—variable capacitors 
of glass, kerosene for a dielectric, brass plates and ebonite 
covers, Zeiss galvanometers with thousands of fine-threaded 
adjusting screws, Siemens milliammeters set on slate sur- 
: ny 


} 


é 


ye 


604 Graviry’s RAInBOow 


faces, terminals designated by Roman numerals, Standard 
Ohms of manganese wire in oil, the old Giilcher Thermo- 
sdule that operated on heating gas, put out 4 volts, nickel 
and antimony, asbestos funnels on top, mica tubing. ... 

Wasn't that life more decent than gangstering? A cleaner 
sort of friendship... less devious, anyway.... There we 
saw how we had to fit in... the machinery itself deter- 
mined that... everything was so clear then, paranoia was 
all for the enemy, and never for one’s own. ... 

—What about the SSP 

—Oh, they were the enemy, I'd say... . [Laughter.] 

No, Klaus, don’t drift away, please, not onto dreams of 
kindly Soviet interrogation that will end in some ermine 
bed, some vodka-perfumed stupor, you know that’s fool- 

B, B-sub-N-for-Narrisch, is nearly here—nearly about to 
burn through the last whispering veil to equal “A”—to 
equal the only fragment of himself left by them to go 
through the moment, the irreducible doll of German sty- 
rene, shabbier, less authentic than any earlier self...a 
negligible quantity in this last light...this tattoo of 
hunters’ boots, and rifle bolts in oiled keyways.... 


O 


Here come Enzian, Andreas, and Christian, coming on like 
Smith, Klein, ’n’ French, crashing into the basement 
room—field-gray kit, newspaper shoes, rolled trouser-cuffs, 
hands and bare forearms shining with motor oil and gear 
grease, toting carbines in a show of force. But no Empty 
Ones here to see them, It’s too late. Just the mute bed, and 
the brown ellipse her blood made on the torn ticking. And 
washing-blue in grainy splashes in the comers, under the 
bed... ther signature, their challenge. 

“Where is she—” Christian is just this, side of berserk. 
One word astray and he'll be off to kill the first Empty 
One he finds. Maria, his sister, is, was, may be— i 
“We'd better,” Enzian already back| out the door, 
“where’s, uh... her husband, you know... .” 

“Pavel.” Christian wants to see his eyes, but Enzian 
won't turn. 


¥ 


¥ 


pi 


In the Zone 605 


Pavel and Maria meant to have the child. Then Josef 
Ombindi and his people started their visiting. They have 
leamed their vulturehood from the Christian missionaries. 
They keep lists of all the women of child-bearing age. Any 
pregnancy is an invitation to hover, to tune in, to swoop. 
They will use threats, casuistry, physical seduction—there’s 
an arsenal of techniques. Washing-blue is the abortifacient 
of choice. 

“The refinery,” suggests Andreas Orukambe. 

“Really? I thought he’d sworn off that.” 

“Maybe not now.” The girl’s brother stares him hard as 
fists. Enzian, old bastard, you really are out of touch.... 

They remount their motorcycles and head off again. 
Blasted drydocks, charcoal ribs of warehouses, cylindrical 
chunks of submarine that never got assembled, go ripping 
by in the darkness. British security are about, but that’s 
another, encapsulated world. The British G-5 occupy their 
own space and Zone congruent but not identical to what 
these serious Schwarzkommando astride bikes) unmuffled 
go blasting on through tonight. 

Separations are proceeding. Each alternative Zone 
speeds away from all the others, in fated acceleration, red- 
shifting, fleeing the Center. Each day the mythical return 
Enzian dreamed of seems less possible. Once it was neces- 
sary to know uniforms, insignia, airplane markings, to 
observe boundaries. But by now too many choices have 
been made. The single root lost, way back there in the 
May desolation. Each bird has his branch now, and each 
one is the Zone. 

A crowd of DPs is milling by the ruin of an omamental 
fountain, a score of them, eyes of ash, smudged into faces 
white as salt. The Hereros go swerving by them, halfway 
up a shallow flight of long steps dovetailing into the grade 
of the street, teeth slamming together upper and lower, 
cycle frames squeaking shrill, up and down the steps past 
wordless plosions of Slavic breath. Ashes and salt. A sound- 
truck appears around a wall a hundred meters away: the 
voice, University-bred and long tired of the message, re- 
Gites, “Clear the streets. Go to your homes.” Clear the—go 
to your what? There must be a mistake, it must be for 
some other town. . 

\ Whir underneath an oil pipeline up on trestles running 


ees 
. 


606 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


down leftward to the water now, huge bolted flanges over 
head softened by rust and oily dirt. Far out in the harbo 
rides an oil tanker, rocking serene as a web of stars... 
Zoom uphill slantwise toward a rampart of wasted, knotted 
fused, and scorched girderwork, stacks, pipes, ducting 
windings, fairings, insulators reconfigured by all the bomb 
ing, grease-stained pebblery on the ground rushing by : 
mile a minute and wait, wait, say what, say “reconfigured, 
now?” 

There doesn’t exactly dawn, no but there breaks, a: 
that light you're afraid will break some night at too deey 
an hour to explain away—there floods on Enzian wha 
seems to him an extraordinary understanding. This ser 
pentine slag-heap he is just about to ride into now, thi 
ex-refinery, Jamf Olfabriken Werke AG, is not a ruin a 
all, It is in perfect working order. Only waiting for the 
right connections to be set up, to be switched on. . .. modi 
fied, precisely, deliberately by bombing that was neve 
hostile, but part of a plan both sides—‘“sides?”—had al. 
ways agreed on... yes and now what if we—all right 
say we are supposed to be the Kabbalists out here, say 
that’s our real Destiny, to be the-scholar-magicians of 'the 
Zone, with somewhere in it a Text, to be picked to pieces. 
annotated, explicated, and masturbated till it’s all squeezec 
limp of its last drop... well we assumed—natiirlich!— 
that this holy Text had to be the Rocket, orururumo oru- 
nene the high, rising, dead, the blazing, the great one 
(“orunene” is already being modified by the Zone-Herere 
children to “omunene,” the eldest brother) ... our Torah. 
What else? Its symmetries, its latencies, the cuteness of it 
enchanted and seduced us while the real Text persisted, 
somewhere else, in its darkness, our darkness... even this 
far from Siidwest we are not to be spared the ancient 
tragedy of lost messages, a curse that will never leave 


ASS ois 

But, if I’m riding through it, the Real Text, right now, 
if this is it...or if I passed it today somewhere in the 
_ devastation of Hamburg, breathing the ash-dust, missing 
it completely... if what the IG built on this site were not 
at all the final shape of it, but only an arrangement of 
fetishes, come-ons to call down special tools in the form 
of 8th AF bombers yes the “Allied” planes all would have 


» In the Zone 607. 


een, ultimately, IG-built, by way of Director Krupp, 
ough his English interlocks—the bombing was the exact 
dustrial process of conversion, each release of energy 
laced exactly in space and time, each shockwave plotted 
1 advance to bring precisely tonight's wreck into being 
ms decoding the Text, thus coding, recoding, derecod- 
ig the holy Text... If it is in working order, what is it 
ant to do? The engineers who built it as a refinery 
ever knew there were any further steps to be taken. 
heir design was “finalized,” and they could forget it. 

It means this War was never political at all, the politics 
as all theatre, all just to keep the people distracted... 
cretly, it was being dictated instead by the needs of tech- 
ology... by a conspiracy between human beings and 
chniques, by something that needed the energy-burst of 
ar, crying, “Money be damned, the very life of [insert 
ame of Nation] is at stake,” but meaning, most likely, 
awn is nearly here, I need my night’s blood, my funding, 
imding, ahh more, more.... The real crises were crises 
f allocation and priority, not among firms—it was only 
aged to look that way—but among the different Technol- 
zies, Plastics, Electronics, Aircraft, and their needs 
hich are understood only by the ruling elite... 

Yes but Technology only responds (how often this 
‘gument has been iterated, dogged and humorless as a 
aussian reduction, among the younger Schwarzkom- 
ando especially), “All very well to talk about having a 
onster by the tail, but do you think we’d’ve had the 
ocket if someone, some specific somebody with a name 
id a penis hadn’t wanted to chuck a ton of Amatol 300 
iles and blow up a block full of civilians? Go ahead, 
pitalize the T on technology, deify it if it'll make you 
el less responsible—but it puts you in with the neutered, 
‘other, in with the eunuchs keeping the harem of our 
olen Earth for the numb and joyless hardons of human 
tans, human elite with no right at all to be where they 
ae 


We have to look for power sources here, and distribu- 
on networks we were never taught, routes of power our 
achers never imagined, or were encouraged to avoid... 
e have to find meters whose scales are unknown in the 
orld, draw our own schematics, getting feedback, making 


= 


608 GRAvITY’s RAINBOW 


connections, reducing the error, trying to learn the real 
function... zeroing in on what incalculable plot? Up 
here, on the surface, coaltars, hydrogenation, synthesis 
were always phony, dummy functions to hide the real, 
the planetary mission yes perhaps centuries in the unroll- 
i . this ruinous plant, waiting for its Kabbalists and 
new alchemists to discover the Key, teach the mysteries to 
others... 

And if it isn’t exactly Jamf Olfabriken Werke? what if 
it’s the Krupp works in Essen, what if it’s Blohm & Voss 
right here in Hamburg or another make-believe “ruin,” in 
another cityP Another countryye YAAAGGGGHHHHHI! 

Well, this is stimulant talk here, yes Enzian’s been 
stuffing down Nazi surplus Pervitins these days like pop- 
corn at the movies, and by now the bulk of the refinery— 
named, incidentally, for the famous discoverer of Onei- 
rine—is behind them, and Enzian is on into some other 
paranoid terror, talking, talking, though each man’s wind 
and motor cuts him off from conversation. 


Sortofa Just a daredevil Desox-yephedrine Daddy 
ee ee With m’pockets full o’ happee daze, 

ia behind Zoomin’ through the Zone, where the wild 
this, here dogs roam, 


Givin’ all m’dreams away . LF 

Took the tubes outa my radi-yo, 

Don’t mean a thing to me— 

Wouldn’t spend a nickel on the Stars ’n’ 
Stripes, cause 

Tm doin’ my own fer free... 


Mouth keeps goin’, nobody listenin’, 
Gabbin’ at a terrible pace— 

Aw, you're so sly, but I wave good-by, 
With a shit-eatin’ grin on m’facel 


| 

Don’tcha ephedrine of me, my honey, 
Swoon just to hear my name— 
In the curfew cells when afl the lights are 

gone, oh, © 7 
Evry thing’ll be the same 
(Just light the candles). 
Ey-rything’ll be the same.... 


In the Zone 609 


Last night in his journal, Enzian wrote: “The Mouth 
itely has been too-much in service. Too little coming out 
f use to anybody. A defense. Oh God, oh God. Then they 
sally are getting at me. Please I don’t want to pontificate 
1is way... 1 know what my voice sounds like—heard it 
t Peenemiinde years ago on Weissmann’s Dictaphone... 
hrome and Bakelite...too high, obnoxious, Berliner 
chnauze... how they must wince inside whenever I 
egin to speak.... 

*“T could go tomorrow. I know how to be alone. It 
oesn’t frighten me as much as they do. They take end- 
ssly—but they never use what they take. What do they 
ink they can take from me? They don’t want my patri- 
rchy, they don’t want my love, they don’t want my in- 
mation, or my work, or my energy, or what I own... 
don’t own anything. There’s no money any more—no- 
ody’s seen any out here for months, no it can’t be 
loney ... cigarettesP I never have enough cigarettes.... 

“If I left them, where could I go?” 

Back among the reservoir tanks now, into the evening 
ind, skidding on this synthetic wastefield, all of it un- 
raded blackness .. . Christian’s motor seems to be missing 
ow and then, dithering toward a stall. Spot decision: if 
e breaks down let him walk. That way less trouble if 
avel’s there, if he’s not there pick up Christian on the 
‘ay back and see about getting a truck out to repair it... 
eep it simple, that’s the mark of a great leader, Enzian. 
Christian doesn’t break down, though, and Pavel turns 
ut to be there, sort of. Well, not “there” the way Enzian 
1 his current state of mind would consider for very long. 
ut present, all right, along with an amazing collection 
f friends who always seem to show up whenever he comes 
) sniff Leunagasolin, such as, oh, the Moss Creature here, 
rightest green you can imagine, more burning than 
uorescent, lurking over in a corner of the field tonight, 
1y, Stirring like an infant now and then... or how about 
1¢ Water Giant, a mile-high visitor made all of flowing 
ater who likes to dance, twisting from the waist, arms 
lowing loosely along the sky. When the Ombindi people 
ok Maria off to find their doctor in Hamburg, voices 
egan calling—voices of the Fungus Pygmies who breed 
| the tanks at the interface between fuel and water-bottom 


610 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


began to call to him. “Pavel! Omunene!l Why don’t you 
come back, to see us? We miss you. Why have you stayed 
away?” Not much fun for them down here at the Inter- 
face, competing with the bacteria who cruise by in thei 
country of light, these cellular aristocracy, approaching the 
wall of hydrocarbons each for his share of God’s abun: 
dance—leaving their wastes, a green murmur, a divergently 
unstable gabbling, a slime that grows with the days thicker, 
more poisonous. It is a depressing thing indeed to be 
pygmy clustered together with thousands of others, hun- 
dreds of thousands, and have to live on the other side of 
all this. You say other side? What do you mean? What 
other side? You mean in the gasoline? (Clustered Pygmies, 
playfully and to some well-known swing riff:) No-no, no, 
no! —-You mean in the water, then? (C.P.:) No-no, no, 
no! —Well you gotta tell me please, fore I drop my 
BVDs! We mean, explain the Pygmies, gathering theit 
little heads into a symmetrical cauliflower pattern, and 
settling into a soft, wistful a cappella like kids around the 
campfire with Bing Crosby in a baseball cap (yes these 
Leunahalluziationen have been known to get weird all 
right, weirder than cultural shock, even, this here is meta- 
shock’s what it is, 3-sigma white faces in a ritual whose 
mystery is deeper. than north light over the Kalahari...) 
we mean on the other side of the whole thing, the whale 
bacteria-hydrocarbon-waste cycle. We can see the Inter- 
face from here. It’s a long rainbow, mostly indigo, if that’s 
any help—indigo and Kelly green (Bing, directing, raises 
up all these brainwashed little Irish faces in a moving 
firelit crescendo) green...gasoline... between... sub- 
marine... fading, because by then Pavel was on his way 
out to the refinery, forget this 214 weeks of self-imposed 
torture, Ombindi’s men after him down by the glasswool 
boiler pipes, men and women both trying to caress him, 
pressure from both sides ofthe Tribal Suicide Question, 
Enzian complaining, too entangled with the Rocket, too 
-encrimsoned in his feud with the Russian, to care much 
about anyone outside himself .. . and here Pavel was trying 
to stay away from this, from the breath lof Mukuru, only 
trying to be a good. man— 
The Moss Creature stirs. It has crept an alarming | 
tance closer since Pavel last looked. A sudden overflow 


a 


Ne ‘In the Zone 611 


smooth cherry-red down the mountainside to his right 
(were there mountains? Where did the mountains come 
from?) and at once he knows, beyond deception or hope, 
that he has slipped into the North, that inhaling the breath 
of the first ancestor has taken him over into the terrible 
land, as he must have known it would, step by step over 
these last years, impossible to tum (what is turn? don’t 
know which way to begin to move... don’t know how to 
move...) too late, miles and changes too late. 
’ And now his head in Christian’s steel notch at 300 yards. 
Suddenly, this awful branching; the two possibilities al- 
ready beginning to fly apart at the speed of thought—a 
new Zone in any case, now, whether Christian fires or re- 
frains—jump, choose— , 

Enzian tries his best—knocks the barrel aside, has a few 
unpleasant words for the young revenger. But both men 
saw the new branches. The Zone, again, has just changed, 
and they are already on, into the new one.... 

They ride on up to where Pavel’s sniffing synthetic gaso- 
line on the side of the lampless beige hill, under the tanks 
snailing whitely to heaven, here he is, one of the IG’s 
happiest customers... . 

Does Pavel know something the rest of us don’t? If the 
IG wanted this to be a cover-up for something else, why 
not the breath of MukuruP 

Enzian can project himself back in the Erdschweinhéhle 

_ Starting a new file on the IG—see it getting fatter and 
_ fatter as the interlocks develop, the books are audited, 
the witnesses come—not forward but sideways at least, 
always in shadows.... And if it should prove not to be 
the Rocket, not the IGP Why then hel have to go on 
- won't he, on to something else—the Volkswagen factory, 
the pharmaceutical companies... and if it isn’t even in 
Germany then he'll have to start in America, or in Russia, 
and if he dies before they find the True Text to study, 
then there'll have to be machinery for others to carry it 
on.... Say, that’s a swell idea—call the whole Erd- 
_schweinhohle together, get up there say, My people, I have 
had a vision...no no but there will need to be more 
staff, if it’s to be that big a search, quiet shifting of re- 
sources away from the Rocket, diversifying while making 
it look like an organic growth... and who to bring in on 


2.) 


612 Gravity’s Rainsow 


it? Christian—can he use the boy now, Christian’s anger, 
will I¢ use Christian regardless to help suppress Ombindi 
. because if the Schwarzkommando mission in the Zone 
has been truly revealed just now, then there'll have to be 
something done about Ombindi, Empty Ones, doctrine of 
the Final Zero. More staff will mean more Zone-Hereros, 
not fewer—more information coming in about the enemy, 
more connections made will mean a greater threat to the 
people, will mean that tribal numbers will have to in- 
crease. Is there an alternative? no...he would rather 
ignore Ombindi but the needs of this new Search will not 
allow him that comfort now... the search will rule. ... 

Somewhere, among the wastes of the World, is the key 
that will bring us back, restore us to our Earth and to our 
freedom. 

Andreas has been talking with Pavel, who is still out 
with his strangely lighted companions, playing at this and 
that. Presently, with love and subterfuge, he gets the 
address of Ombindi’s medical connection. 

Enzian knows who he is. “Saint Pauli. Let’s go. Your 
machine running a little rough, Christian?” 

“Don’t sweet-talk me,” Christian explodes, “you don’t 
care about me, you don’t care about my sister, she’s dying 
out there and you just keep plugging her into your equa- 
tions—you—play this holy-father routine and inside that. 
ego you don’t even hate us, you don’t care, youre not 
even connected any more—” He swings his fist at Enzian’s 
face. He’s crying. 

Enzian stands there and lets him. It hurts, He lets it. 
His meekness isn’t all politics, either. He can feel enough 
of the bone truth in what Christian said—maybe not all of 
it, not all at once, but enough, 

“You just connected. Can we go after her, now?” 


O ) 


Here is the good Frau, leaning over Slothrop from way 
down at the foot of the bed: her eye bright and cocky as” 
a parrot’s, a big white boss of eye cantilevered on old 
prickly arms and legs, a black kerchief above the roll, of 
her pompadaus in mourning for all her Hanseatic dead, 


i 
2 


i. 


In the Zone 608 


sd grecatlh heaving iron Sects, under waves of the Baltic 
keel-edged and gray, dead under the fleets of waves, the 
prairies of the sea.... 

Next thing is Gerhardt von Gdll’s foot nudging Slothrop 
in a less than tender way. The sun is up, and all the girls 
have gone. Otto grouches around deck with a broom and 
swab, removing yesterday's chimpanzee shit. Swinemiinde. 

The Springer is his old chipper self; “Fresh eggs and 
coffee in the pilot house—fall to. We’re due out of here in 
15 minutes.” 

“Well just belay that ‘we,’ Ace.” 

“But I need your help.” Springer’s. wearing a suit of fine 
tweed this morning, very Savile Row, fits perfectly— 

“Narrisch needed your help.” 

“You don’t know what you're talking about.” His eyes 
are steelies that never lose, His laugh, subtitled Humoring 
the Fools, is Mitteleuropiéisch and mirthless, “All right, all 
right. How much do you want?” 

“fiverything’s got a price, right?’ But he’s not being 
noble here, no, what it is is that his own price has just 
occurred to him, and he needs to shim the talk here, give it 
a second to breathe and develop, 

“verything.” 

“What's the deal?” 

“A minor piracy. Pick up one package for me while I 
cover you.” He looks at his watch, hamming it up. 

“O.K., get me a discharge, I'll come with you.” 

“A what? A discharge? For you? Hal Hal Hal” 

) "You ought to laugh more, Springer. It makes you look 

ion cute.” P 
“What kind of a discharge, Slothrop? Honorable, per- 

dhispe? Ah, ah-hal Hal Hal” Like Adolf Hitler, Springer is 

easily tickled by what the Germans call Schadenfreude, 

the feeling of joy at another’s misfortune. 

“Quit fooling, I’m serious.” 

“Of course you are, Slothrop!” More giggling. 

Slothrop waits, watches, sucking on an egg though he 
feels anyt but sly this morning, 

h, you see, was supposed to go with me today. 
‘Now I'm stuck with you, Ha! Hal Where do you want it 
delivered, this—ha—this discharge?” 

- “Cuxhaven.” Slothrop has been having lately this dim 


dF) 


614 Graviry’s RAInsow 


fantasy about trying to contact the Operation Backfire 
people in Cuxhaven, to see if theyll help get him out. 
They seem to be the only English connection to the 
Rocket any more. He knows already it won’t work. He and 
Springer arrange a date anyhow. 

“Be at a place called Putzi’s. It’s down the Dorum road. 
Local dealers will be able to tell you where.” 

So it’s out once again—out past the moles’ wet embrace, 
into the Baltic, crest to crest, and into nimbus piling sheet 
on sheet bounces the jolly pirate bark, into a day already 
squally and bitter, and getting worse. Springer stands out- 
side the pilot house hollering in above the sound of heavy 
seas that splash back over the bow and down the decks. 
“Where do you make her?” 

“If it’s Copenhagen she’s bound for,” Frau Gnahb’s 
windburned face, permanent smile-creases all around her 
eyes and mouth, — like the sun, “can’t have more 
than an hour on us. 

Visibility this morning is too low to see the coast of 
Usedom. Springer joins Slothrop at the rail looking. at 
nothing, breathing the closing smell of gray weather. 

“He’s all right, Slothrop., He’s seen worse. Two months 
ago in Berlin we got ambushed, right outside the Chicago. 
He walked through crossfire from three Schmeissers to 
offer our competitors a deal. Not a scratch.” 

“Springer, he was going round and round with half the 
Russian Army up there.” 

“They won't tall him. They know who he is. He worked 
in guidance, he was Schilling’s best man, he knows more 
about integrating circuits than anybody they'll find outside 
of Garmisch now. The Russians ‘are offering fantastic 
salaries—better than the Americans—and they'll let him 
stay in Germany, work at Peenemiinde or the Mittelwerke, 
just like he used to. He can even escape, if that’s what he 
wants, we have very good connections for that—” 

“But what if they did shoot him?” 

“No. They weren’t supposed to.” 

“Springer, this ain’t the fuckin’ movies now, come on.” 

“Not yet. Maybe not quite yet. You'd better enjoy it 
while you can. Someday, when the film is fast enough, the 
equipment pocket-size and burdenless and selling at peo- 
ple’s prices, the lights and booms no longer necessary, 


—— ag 


In the Fong 615 


hen...then...” We now come.in sight of mythical 
Rtigen off our starboard bow. Its chalk cliffs are brighter 
han the sky. There is mist in the firths, and among the 
yreen oaks. Along the beaches drift pearl patches of fog. 

Our captain, Frau Gnahb, heads into the Greifswalder 
Bodden, to comb the long firths for her quarry. After an 
10ur (comical basoon solos over close-ups of the old rec- 
eant guzzling some horrible. fermented potato-mash 
obotomy out of a jerrican, wiping her mouth on her 
leeve, belching) of fruitless search, our modern-day 
sirates head out to sea again, and up the eastern coast of 
he. island. 

Light rain has been falling. Otto breaks out slickers, and 
2 Thermos of hot soup. Clouds, a dozen shades of gray, go 
cudding along the sky. Great misty heaps of rock, steep 
liffs, streams in deep gorges, gray and green and spires 
f white chalk in the rain, go passing—the Stubbenkam- 
ner, the King’s Seat, and presently, off to port, Cape 
Arkona where waves crash at the base of the cliffs and on 
op the groves of white-trunked trees are blowing.... 
[he ancient Slavs put up a temple here, to Svetovid, their 
30d of fertility and war. Old Svetovid did business under 
yuite a number of aliases! Three-headed Triglav, five- 
veaded Porevit, SEVEN-faced Rugevit! Tell that to your 
b0ss next time he talks about “wearing two hats!” Now, as 
Arkona slides away off our port. quarter— 

“There she is,” Otto calls from the top of the pilot 
iouse. Far far away, hauling out to sea from behind the 
Wissow Klinken (the pale limestone latchkey with which 
Providence today i is probing the wards of Slothrop’s heart), 
"a visible in the rain, dips a tiny white ghost of a 


‘Cat, a bearing,” Frau Gnahb grabbing the wheel and 
racing her feet. “We want a collision course!” Otto 
rouches by the pelorus, shivering. 

“Here, Slothrop.” 
Luger? Box of rounds? “What...” 
“Came this morning with the egg delivery.” 
_ “You didn’t mention—” 
“He may be a little exercised. But he’s a realist. Your 
riend Greta and I knew him in Warsaw, in the old days.” 
“Springer—tell me Springer, now, what ship is that?” 


yy) . 


‘ 
Ps 


Be 


616 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


Springer hands him some binoculars. In fine gold lettering, 
behind the golden jackal on the wraith-white bow, is the 
name he already knows. “O.... K.,” trying to see through 
the rain into Springer’s eyes, “you knew I was aboard. 
You're setting me up, now, right?” 
“When were you on board?” 
. “Come on—” 

~“T.ook—Narrisch was going after the package today. 
Not you. We didn’t even know you. Do you have to see 
conspiracies in everything? I don’t control the Russians, 
and I didn’t deliver him—” 

“You're really pushing that innocence today, ain’t you?” 

“Quit bickering, idiots,” hollers Frau Gnahb, “and 
clear—for action!” 

Lazy and spectral pitches the Anubis, growing no 
clearer as they close with her. Springer reaches a mega- 
phone out of the pilot house, and bawls, “Good day, 
Procalowski—permission to come aboard.” 

The answer is a gunshot. Springer hits the deck, slicker 
in rattling yellow flow, lies on his back with the mega- 
phone pointing up funneling rain in his mouth: “We'll 
have to without permission, then—” Motioning Slothrop 
over, “Get ready to board.” To Frau Gnahb, “We'll want 
to lash on.” 

“Fine but,” one look at the evil leer now lighting up 
Otto’s mother’s face and it’s clear that she didn’t come out 
today for money, “when do I get to, to ram her?” 

Alone on the sea with the Anubis. Slothrop has begun 
to sweat, unpleasantly. The green rocky coast of Riigen 
backdrops them, rising and falling through the squall. 
Zonggg another shot rattlesnaking off of a bulkhead. 
“Ram,” orders the Springer. The storm comes down in 
earnest. Gleeful Frau Gnahb, humming through her teeth, 
spins the wheel, spokes blurring, prow swinging over 
aiming for midships. The blank side of the Anubis rushes 
in—is the Frau gonna bust on through it like a paper 
hoop? Faces behind portholes, cook peeling potatoes out- 
side the galley, drunk in a frock coat sleeping on the rainy 
deck and sliding as the ship rolls... ah—-ja, ja, a huge 
blue-flowered bowl of shredded potatoes at her elbow, a 
window, cast-iron flowers on spiral vine all painted white, 
a mild smell of cabbage and dishrags from under the 
sink, an apron bow snug and tight above her kidneys and 


In the Zone 617 


lambs about her legs and ja little, oh, ja, here comes 
littlke—ah—here comes herecomes LITTLE—AHH— 

OTTO! slams her boat into the Anubis, a most likin 
earsplitting Otto. . 

“Stand by.” Springer’ s on his feet. Procalowski is turning 
away and increasing engine speed. Frau Gnahb moves up 
again on the yacht’s starboard quarter, wallowing in her 
wake. Otto passes out grappling hooks, long in Hanseatic 
service, iron, pitted, functional-looking, as Mutti puts it 
all head full. Couples have wandered out under awnings on 
the Anubis to watch the fun, pointing, laughing, gaily 
waving. Girls, their nude breasts beaded with rain, blow 
kisses while the band plays a Guy Lombardo arrangement 
of “Running Between the Raindrops.” 

Up the slippery ladder goes salty and buccaneering 
Slothrop, hefting his grappling hook, letting out line, keep- 
ing an eye on that Otto—wind up, spin like a lasso, 
wheeee—clank. Springer and Otto at bow and stern are 
grappling on at the same time, hauling in as the vessels 
hit, bounce, hit, .. but the Anubis, softwhite, has slowed, 
sprawled, allowed... Otto gets line around chocks for- 
ward and up around the scrimshawed railing of the 
yacht—then dashes aft, sneakers splashing, ribbed foot- 
prints left behind then rained out, to repeat the lashing 
there. A newly-arranged river roars, white and violent, 
backward between the two ships. Springer is already up 
on the yacht’s main deck. Slothrop tucks Luger in belt 
and follows. 

Springer with the classic gangster head-move gestures 
him up the bridge. Slothrop moves through groping hands, 

_ greetings in broken Russian, puffs of alcoholic breath, 

_ around to the ladder on the port side—climbing, edging’ 
quietly onto the bridge. But Procalowski is only sitting in 
the captain’s chair smoking one of Springer’s amis with 
his cap tilted back, and Springer’s just at the punch line 
to one of his giant repertoire of German toilet jokes. 

“What the devil, Gerhardt,” Procalowski waving a 
thumb. “The Red Army’s working for you too?” 

: “Hello again, Antoni.” The three silver stars on each of 

his epaulets twinkle howdy, but it’s no good. 

“IT don’t know you.” To the Springer: “All right. It’s in 

_ the engine room. Starboard side, down behind the genera- 
tor,” which is Slothrop’s cue to leave. 


618 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


At the bottom of the ladder he meets Stefania coming 
along the passageway. “Hi. Sorry we have to meet again 
this way.” 

“Hello, I’m Stefania,” shuttering a fast smile as she 
passes, “there’s liquor next deck up, enjoy yourself,” al- 
ready gone, out in the rain. What? 

.. Slothrop steps down through a hatchway, starts to climb 
down toward the engineering spaces. Somewhere above 
him three bells strike, slowly, a little hollow, with a slight 
echo. It’s late... late. He remembers where he is. 

Just as he touches the deck, all the lights go out. Air 
blowers whine down in stillness. The engine room is down 
one more deck. Will he have to do this in the dark? 

“T can’t,” out loud. 

“You can,” replies a voice close to his ear. He can feel 
its breath. He is smashed expertly at the base of the neck. 
Light loops through the pitch dark. His left arm has gone 
numb, “Ill leave you the other one,” the voice whispers, 
“for climbing down to the engine room.” 

“Wait—” It feels like the pointed toe of a dancing- 
pump, in out of nowhere to hover a,second and stroke the 
soft underside of his chin—then it flicks up, slamming his 
teeth shut on his tongue. 

The pain is awful. He tastes blood. Sweat gathers next 
to his eyes. 

“Move, now.” When he hesitates he is pinched on the 
back of the neck. Oh, it hurts... he holds to the ladder, 
night-blind, starting to cry ... then he thinks of the Luger, 
but before he can get to it he’s been kicked viciously be- 
tween hip and groin. The gun falls to the steel deck. 
Slothrop is down on one knee, groping, when the shoe 
descends lightly on his fingers. “You will need this hand 
for holding on to the ladder, remember? Remember?” 
Then the shoe is lifted, but only to kick him under the 
armpit. “Up, up.” 

Slothrop gropes to the next ladder, makes his stiff one- 
armed way down onto it. He feels the steel hatch-opening 
rise around him. “Don’t try to come back| up till you've 
done what you have to do.” ater | 

“Thanatz?” Slothrop’s tongue hurts. The name comes 
out clumsily. Silence. “Morituri?” No answer. Slothrop 
moves one foot up one rung. 

“No, no. I’m still here.” 


In the Zone 619 


As he edges downward, shaking, rung by rung, feeling 
prickles back into his arm, How can he go down? How 
can he go up? He tries to concentrate on the pain. His 
feet strike steel plate finally. Blindness. He moves to star- 
board, colliding at every step with shin-high edges, sharp 
projections ...I don’t want to.... how can1...reach down 
behind. ... bare hands ...what if... 

A sudden whine to his right—something mechanical— 
he jumps, breath sucking very cold between teeth, nerves 
in back and arms off and on, skittering...he reaches a 
cylindrical barrier...might be the. generator... stoops 
and begins to— His hand closes on stiff taffeta. He jerks it 
away, tries to get up, slams his head against something 
sharp... he wants to crawl back toward the ladder, but 
has lost all sense of direction now... he squats, turning in 
a circle, slowly ...let it end letitend.... But his hands, 
pawing the deck, return to slippery satin. 

“No,” Yes: hooks and eyes. He breaks a. fingernail, 
trying to lose them but they follow... lacing that moves, 
snake-sure, entangling, binding each finger... . 

_ “No....” He rises to a crouch, moves forward into some- 

thing hanging from the overhead. Icy little thighs in wet 
silk swing against his face. They smell of the sea. He 
tums away, only to be lashed across the cheek by long wet 
hair. No matter which way he tries to move now... cold 
nipples...the deep cleft of her buttocks, perfume and 
shit and the smell of brine .. . and the smell of ... of... 

When the lights come back on, Slothrop is on his knees, 
breathing carefully. He knows he will have to open his 
eyes. The compartment reeks now with suppressed light— 
with mortal possibilities for light—as the body, in times 
of great sadness, will feel its real chances for pain: real 
and terrible and only just under the threshold.... The 
brown paper bundle is two inches from his knee, wedged 
behind the generator. But it’s what’s dancing dead-white 
and scarlet at the edges of his sight... and are the lad- 
ders back up and out really as empty as they look? 


Back on the Frau’s boat, Springer is out with a bottle 
of champagne courtesy of the Anubis, untwisting the 
bright wires and firing the cork in a farewell salvo. Slo- 
throp’s hands are shaking and he spills most of his. Antoni 
and Stefania watch from the bridge as the two vessels pull . 


S 


620 Gravity's Rainsow 


apart, Baltic sky visible through the backs of their eyes. 
Her white hair in filaments of foam, her cheeks sculptured 
fog... cloud-man, fog-wife, they dwindle, aloof, silent, 
back into the heart of the storm. 

The Frau heads south, along the other coast of Riigen, 
into the straits by way of the Bug. The storm keeps pace, 
as night comes down. “We'll put in at Stralsund,” her 
scrawled face streaming with lube-green shadow, yellow 
light, as the oil-lantern sways in the pilot house. 

Slothrop reckons he'll get off there. Head for that Cux- 
haven. “Springer, you think you'll have those papers for 
me on time?” 

“I can’t guarantee anything,” sez Gerhardt yon Goll. 

At Stralsund, on the quai, in the lamplight and the rain, 
they say good-by. Frau Gnahb kisses Slothrop, and Otto 
gives him a pack of Lucky Strikes. The Springer looks up 
from his green notebook and nods auf Wiedersehen over 
his pince-nez. Slothrop walks away, over the brow, into 
the wet Hafenplatz, sea-legs trying to balance rolling he’s 
left behind, past booms and masts and strung tackle of 
derricks, past a crew on the night shift offloading the 
creaking lighters into wood wagons, bowed gray horses 
kissing the grassless stones.,.good-bys in ‘his pockets 
warming his empty hands.... 


O 


Where is the Pope whose staff will bloom for me? 
Her mountain vamps me back, with silks and scents, 
Her oiled, athletic slaves, her languid hints 

Of tortures transubstantiate to sky, 

To purity of light—of bonds that sing, 

And whips that trail their spectra as they fall. 

At weather’s mercy now, I find her call 

At every turn, at night’s foregathering. ° 


I've left no sick Lisaura’s fate behind. 

I made my last confession as I knelt, 

Agnostic, in the radiance of his jewel... | 
Here, underneath my last and splintering wind, 
No song, no lust, no memory, no guilt: 
No pentacles, no cups, no holy Fool.... | 


Brigadier Pudding died back in the middle of June of a 
massive E. coli infection, whining, at the end, “Me little 


In the Zone 621 


Mary hurts. over and over. It was just before dawn, 
as he had \ Thed Katje stayed on at “The White Visita- 
_ tion” for a while, roaming the demobbed corridors, smoky 

and still at the ends of all the emptied lattices of cages in 
the laboratory, herself part of the ash-colored web, the 
thickening dust and fly-pocked windows. 

One day she found the cans of film, stacked carelessly. 
by Webley Silvernail in what had been a music room, oc- 
cupied now only by a disintegrating Wittmaier harpsi- 
chord no one played, quills and stops broken shamefully, 
strings left to sharp, flat, or corrode in the busy knives of 
weather pushing relentlessly into all the rooms. Pointsman 
happened that day to be up in London, working out of 
Twelfth House, lingering at alcoholic luncheons with his 
various industrialists. Was he forgetting her? Would she 
be free? Was she, already? 

Out of apparently nothing more than the emptiness of 
“The White Visitation,” she finds a projector, threads a 
reel and focuses the image on a water-stained wall, next to 
a landscape of some northern coomb, with daft aristocrats 
larking about. She sees a white-haired girl in Pirate Pren- 
tice’s Chelsea maisonette, a face so strange that she has 
recognized the mediaeval rooms before she does herself. 

When did they—ah, the day Osbie Feel was processing 
the Amanita mushrooms.... Fascinated, she stares at 
twenty minutes of herself in pre-Piscean fugue. What on 
earth did they use it for? The answer to that one’s in the 
can too, and it isn’t long before she finds it—Octopus 
Grigori in his tank, watching the Katje footage. Clip after 
clip: flickering screen and cutaways to Octopus G., star- 
ing—each with its typewritten date, showing the improve- 
ment in the creature’s conditioned reflex. 

Spliced on at the end of all this, inexplicably, is what 
seems to be a screen test of Osbie Feel, of all people. 
There is a sound track. Osbie is improvising a scenario for 
a movie he’s written, entitled: 


Doprr’s GREED 
“We open with Nelson Eddy in the background, singing: 


Doper’s greed, 
Oh, doper’s greed]! 


622 Gravity’s Rainsow 


It’s the most disgustin’ thing I ever seed! i 
When you're out there feelin’ fine, 

It'll turn you into swine, 

If you ever get a taste of DOPER’S GREED! 


“Now into town ride two trail-weary cowboys, Basil 
Rathbone and S. Z. (‘Cuddles’) Sakall. At the entrance to 
town, barring their way, stands the Midget who played 
the lead in Freaks. The one with the German accent. He is 
the town sheriff. He is wearing an enormous gold star that 
nearly covers his chest. Rathbone and Sakall rein up, with 
uneasy smiles on their faces. 

“RATHBONE: That can’t possibly be real, can it? 

“SAKALL: Hoo, hoo! Of course that’s real, you wretched 
eddict, you vent ’n’ chewed too much o” that veird cectus, 
beck down the trail. You should hey smucked that nice 
veed Thad, I tuld you— 

“RATHBONE (with his nervous 5 Sickly Smile): Please—I 
don’t need a Jewish mother. I know what’s real, and what 
isn’t real. 

“(The Midget, meanwhile, is posturing: in different 
tough-hombre attitudes, and waving a brace of elgane 
Colts about. ) 

“SAKALL: Vhen you been out on the Ps i Bet 
know vhich trail too, don’t you you sniveling punk—for as 
long as I have, you know ah real midget sheriff from ah 
hallucinated vun. 

“RATHBONE: I hadn’t known either class existed. You 
must obviously have seen midget sheriffs all over this 
Territory, else you would hardly have invented the cate- 
gory. O-or would you? You know, you're just dodgy 
enough to try anything. 

“SaKALL: You forgot ‘You old rescal.’ 

“RATHBONE: You old rascal. 

“They laugh, draw their guns, and eee a few play- 
ful shots. The Midget is rushing back and forth, furious, 
emitting high-pitched German-accented Westernisms like 
‘This town ain’t big enough for both of us!’ 

“SAKALL: Vell, vere both seeing him. That means he’s 
real, 

“RATHBONE: Joint hallucination is not unknown in our 
world, podner. 


In the Zone 623 


“SaKaLL: Who sez it’s joint hallucination? Hoo, hoo! If it 
vas any kind of hallucination—I’m not saying it is, now— 
it vould be peyote. Or jimson veed, mebbe. ... 

“This interesting conversation goes on for an hour and 
a half. There are no cuts. The Midget is active the whole 
time, reacting to the many subtle and now and then 
dazzling points presented. Occasionally the horses will shit 
in the dust. It is not clear if the Midget knows that his 
reality is being discussed. Another of this film’s artful 
ambiguities. Finally, Rathbone and Sakall agree that the 
only way to settle the argument is to kill the Midget, who 
gathers their intention and runs off screaming down the 
street. Sakall laughs so hard he falls off his horse into the 
horse trough, and we get a final closeup of Rathbone smil- 
ing, in his uncertain way. Fade up song: 


When you're out there feelin’ fine, 
Ill turn you into swine, 
If you ever get a taste of Doper’s Greed!” 


There is a brief epilogue to this, with Osbie trying to 
point out that of course the element of Greed must be 
worked somehow into the plot line, in order to justify the 
title, but the film runs out in the middle of an “uh...” 

Katje by now is in a bewildered state, but she knows a 
message when she sees it. Someone, a hidden friend at 
“The White Visitation”—perhaps Silvernail himself, who’s 
been less than fanatically loyal to Pointsman and his lot— 
has planted Osbie Feel’s screen test deliberately here, 
where they knew she'd find it: She rewinds and runs the 
film again. Osbie is looking straight into the camera: 
Straight at her, none of your idle doper’s foolery here, he’s 
acting. There’s no mistake. It is a message, in code, which 
after not too long she busts as follows. Say that Basil 
Rathbone stands for young Osbie himself. S. Z. Sakall may 
be Mr. Pointsman, and the Midget sheriff the whole dark 
grandiose Scheme, wrapped in one small package, dimin- 
ished, a clear target. Pointsman argues that it’s real, but 
Osbie knows better. Pointsman ends up in the stagnant 
trough, and the plot/Midget vanishes, frightened, into the 
dust. A prophecy. A kindness. She returns to her open cell, 


_ gathers a few belongings in a bag, and walks out of “The 
» 7 


| 


-s - 


 . 


624 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


White Visitation,” past the unclipped topiary hedges, 
growing back into reality, past peacetime’s returned mad- 
men sitting gently in the sun. Once, outside Scheveningen, 
she walked the dunes, past the waterworks, past the blocks 
of new flats replacing the torn-down slums, concrete still 
wet inside its shuttering, with the same hope of escape in 
her heart—moved, a vulnerable shadow, so long ago, 
toward her rendezvous with Pirate by the windmill called 
“The Angel.” Where is he now? Is he still living in Chel- 
seaP Is he even alive? 

Osbie is at home, anyway, chewing spices, smoking 
reefers, and shooting cocaine. The last of his wartime stash, 
One grand eruption. He’s been up for three days. He 
beams at Katje, a sunburst in primary colors spiking out 
from his head, waves the needle he’s just taken out of his 
vein, clamps between his teeth a pipe as big as a saxo- 
phone and puts on a deerstalker cap, which does not affect 
the sunburst a bit. 

“Sherlock Holmes. Basil Rathbone. I was right,” out of 
breath, letting her bag fall with a thump. 

The aura pulses, bows modestly, He is also steel, he is 
rawhide and sweat. “Good, good. There’s the son of Frank- 
enstein in it, too. I wish we could have been more direct, 
but—” 

“Where’s Prentice?” 

“Out scouting up some transportation.” He leads her to 
a back room fitted out with telephones, a cork board with 
notes pinned all over, desks littered with maps, schedules, 
An Introduction to Modern Herero, corporate histories, 
spools of recording wire. “Not very organized around here 
yet. But it’s coming along, love, it’s coming.” 

Is this what she thinks it isP Wakened from how many 
times and pushed away because it won't do to hope,- not 
this much? Dialectically, sooner or later, some counter- 
force would have had to arise. ..she must not have been 
political enough: never enough to keep faith that it would 

. . even with all the power on the other side, that it really 
would. ... y 

Osbie has pulled up folding chairs: hands her now a 
mimeographed sheaf, rather fat it is, “One or two things, 
here, you should know. We hate to rush you. But the ae 
trough is waiting,” 


In-the Zone 625 


And presently, his modulations having flowed through 
the rooms in splendid (and for a while distracting) dis- 
plays of bougainvillea red and peach, it seems he has 
stabilized for the moment into the not-quite-worldly hero of 
a lost Victorian children’s book, for he answers, after her 
hundredth version of the same question, “In the Parliament 
of Life, the time comes, simply, for a division. We are 
a in the corridors we have chosen, moving toward the 

oor. 


O 


Dear Mom, I put a couple of people in Hell today.... 


—Fragment, thought to be from 
the Gospel of Thomas 
(Oxyrhynchus papyrus number classified) 


Who would have thought so many would be here? They 
keep appearing, all through this disquieting structure, 
gathered in groups, pacing alone in meditation, or study- 
ing the paintings, the books, the exhibits. It seems to be 
some very extensive museum, a place of many levels, and 
new wings that generate like living tissue—though if it all 
does grow toward some end shape, those who are here 
inside can’t see it. Some of the halls are to be entered at 
one’s peril, and monitors are standing at all the approaches 
to make this clear. Movement among these passages is 
without friction, skimming and rapid, often headlong, as on 
perfect roller skates, Parts of the long galleries are open 
to the sea. There are cafés to sit in and watch the sun- 
sets—or sunrises, depending on the hours of shifts and 
symposia. Fantastic pastry carts come by, big as pantechni- 
cons: one has to go inside, search the numberless shelves, 
each revealing treats gooier and sweeter than the last ... 
chefs stand by with ice-cream scoops at the ready, awaiting 
only a word from the saccharomaniac client to swiftly mold 
and rush baked Alaskas of any size and flavor to the ovens 
... there are boats of baklava stuffed with Bavarian cream, 
_ topped with curls of bittersweet chocolate, broken al- 
_ monds, cherries as big as ping-pong balls, and popcorn in 
melted marshmallows and butter, and thousands of kinds 


7 


626 Gravity's RAINBOW 


of fudge, from liquorice to divinity, being slapped out on 
the flat stone tables, and taffy-pulling, all by hand, that 
sometimes extends around corners, out windows, back in 
another corridor—er, excuse me, sir, could you hold this 
for a moment? thank you—the joker is gone, leaving Pirate 
Prentice here, newly arrived and still a bit puzzled with it 
all, holding one end of a candy clew whose other end 
could be anywhere at all... well, he might as well follow 
it... prowling along looking quite wry, reeling in taffy by 
the yard, occasionally stuffing a bit in his mouth—mm, 
peanut butter and molasses—well, its labyrinthine path 
turns out, like Route One where it passes through the heart 
of Providence, to’ve been set up deliberately to give the 
stranger a tour of the city. This taffy trick is a standard 
orientation device here it seems, for Pirate now and then - 
will cross the path of some other novice... often theyll 
have a time getting their strands of taffy disentangled, 
which has also been planned as a good, spontaneous way 
for the newcomers to meet. The tour now takes Pirate out 
into an open courtyard, where a small crowd has formed 
around one of the Erdschweinhdhle delegates in a rip- 
roaring argument with some advertising executive over 
what else but the Heresy Question, already a pebble in the 
shoe of this Convention, and perhaps to be the rock on 
which it will founder. Street-entertainers go by: self- 
taught tumblers doing amazing handsprings on pavement 
that seems dangerously hard and slippery, choirs of kazoos 
playing Gilbert & Sullivan medleys, a boy and girl who 
dance not along the level street but up and down, usually 
at the major flights of steps, whenever there’s a queue to 
be waited through, ... 

Gathering up his ball of taffy, which by now is growing 
quite cumbersome, Pirate passes Beaverboard Row, at it is 
known: comprising the offices of all the Committees, with 
the name of each stenciled above the doorway—A4 .. . 1G 

. OIL FIRMS . . . LOBOTOMY . . . SELF-DEFENSE . . . 
HERESY... ; 

“Naturally you're seeing this all through a soldier’s eyes,” 
she’s very young, insouciant, wearing a silly small young- 
woman’s hat of the period, her face clean and steady 
enough for the broad-shouldered, high-waisted, no-neck 
profile they’re all affecting these days. She moves along 


In the Zone 627 


beside him taking long and graceful steps, swings her 
arms, tosses her head—reaches over to grab some of his 
taffy, and touching his hand as she does so. 

“For you it’s all a garden,” he suggests. 

“Yes, Perhaps you're not such a stick after all.” 

Ah, they do bother him, these free women in their teens, 
their spirits are so contagious, 


Tl tell you it’s just —out, —ray, Where did the swing 
—juss band come from? 
eri: A She’s bouncing up 

Spirit is so —con, —tay, —juss, and down, she 

Nobody knows their a-ges... wants to be 


jitterbugged, he sees 
Walkin’ through bees of hon —ney, hie ee 
Throwin’ away —that —mon, —ney, 
Laughin’ at things so —fun —ny, 
_ Spirit’s comin’ through —to, —youl 


Nev —ver, —mind, whatcha hear from your car, 
Take a lookit just —how —keen —they are, 
Nev —ver, —anind, —what, your calendar say, 
Ev’rybody’s nine months old today] Hey, 

Pages are turnin’ pages, 

Nobody’s in —their, —ca, —ges, 

Spirit’s just so —con, —ta, —gious— 

Just let the Spirit —move, —for, —youl 


The only office not physically touching the others on 
Beaverboard Row, intentionally set apart, is a little cor- 
rugated shack, stovepipe coming out the top, pieces of 
automobile lying around rusted solid in the yard, piles of 
wood under rain-colored and failing canvas, a house 
trailer with its tires and one wheel tilted forlorn in the 
spanging of the cold rain at its weathered outsides... 
DEVIL'S ADVOCATE’s what the shingle sez, yes inside is a 
Jesuit here to act in that capacity, here to preach, like his 
colleague Teilhard de Chardin, against return. Here to say 
that critical mass cannot be ignored. Once the technical 
means of control have reached a certain size, a certain 
degree of being connected one to another, the chances for 
freedom are over for good. The word has ceased to have 
meaning. It’s a potent case Father Rapier makes here, not 
_ without great moments of eloquence, moments when he 
himself is clearly moved...no need even to be there, at 


628 Gravity’s RaInsow 


the office, for visitors may tune in from anywhere in the 
Convention to his passionate demonstrations, which often 
come in the midst of celebrating what hep humorists here 
are already calling “Critical Mass” (get it? not too many 
did in 1945, the Cosmic Bomb was still trembling in its 
earliness, not yet revealed to the People, so you heard the 
term only in the very superhepcat-to-hepcat exchanges). 
“I think that there is a terrible possibility now, in the 
World. We may not brush it away, we must look at it. It 
is possible that They will not die. That it is now within 
the state of Their art to go on forever—though we, of 
course, will keep dying as we always have. Death has 
been the source of Their power. It was easy enough for 
us to see that. If we are here once, only once, then clearly 
we are here to take what we can while we may. If They 
have taken much more, and taken not only from Earth but 
also from us—well, why begrudge Them, when they’re 
just as doomed to die as we are? All in the same boat,-all 
under the same shadow... yes... yes. But is that really 
true? Or is it the best, and the most carefully propagated, 
of all Their lies, known and unknown? 

“We have to carry on under the possibility that we die 
only because They want us to: because They need our 
terror for Their survival. We are their harvests. ... 

“Tt must change radically the nature of our faith. To 
ask that we keep faith in Their mortality, faith that They 
also cry, and have fear, and feel pain, faith They are only 
pretending Death is Their servant—faith in Death as the 
master of us all—is to ask for an order of courage that I 
know is beyond my own humanity, though I cannot speak 
for others.... But rather than make that leap of faith, 
perhaps we will choose instead to tum, to fight: to de- 
mand, from those for whom we die, our own immortality. 
They may not be dying in bed any more, but maybe They 
can still die from violence. If not, at least we can learn to 
withhold from Them our fear of Death. For every kind of 
vampire, there is a kind of cross. And at least the physical 
things They have taken, from Earth and from us, can be 
dismantled, demolished—returned to where it all came 
from, 

“To believe that each of Them will personally die is also 
to believe that Their system will die—that some chance of 


In the Zone ‘629 


renewal, some dialectic, is still operating—in History. To 
affirm Their mortality is to affirm. Return. I have been 
pointing out certain obstacles in the way. of affirming 
Return....” It sounds like a disclaimer, and the priest 
sounds afraid. Pirate and the girl have been listening to 
him as they linger outside a hall Pirate would enter. It 
isn’t clear if she will come in with him. No, he rather 
thinks not. It is exactly the sort of room he was afraid it 
would be. Jagged holes in the walls, evidently where fix- 
tures have been removed, are roughly plastered over. The 
others, waiting for him it seems, have been passing the 
time with games in which pain is the overt commodity, 
such as Charley-Charley, Hits ‘n’ Cuts, and Rock-Scissors- 
and-Paper. From next door comes a sound of splashing 
water and all-male giggling that echoes a bit: off of the 
tiles. “And now,” a fluent wireless announcer can be heard, 
“it’s time for? Drop—The Soap!” Applause and shrieks of 
laughter, which go on for a disagreeably long time. 

“Drop the Soap?” Sammy Hilbert-Spaess ambles over to 
the thin dividing wall, puts his nose around the end of it 
to have a look. 

“Noisy neighbors,” remarks German film director Ger- 
hardt von Goll. “Doesn’t this sort of thing ever stop?” 

“Hullo, Prentice,” nods a. black man Pirate doesn’t 
recognize, “we seem to be old school tie.” What is this, 
who are all these— His name is St.-Just Grossout. “For 
most of the Duration, the Firm had me trying to infiltrate 
the Schwarzkommando. I never saw anyone else trying to. 
It sounds a bit paranoiac, but I think I was the only 
one....” This forthright breach of security, if that’s what 
it is, takes Pirate a little aback. 

“Do you think you could—well, give me a sort of sitrep 
on all this?” 

“Oh, Geoffrey. Oh, my.” Here comes Sammy Hilbert- 
Spaess back from watching the shower-room frolic, shak- 
ing his head, pouched and Levantine eyes continuing to 
stare straight down his nose, “Geoffrey, by the time you 
get any summary, the whole thing will have changed. We 
could shorten them for you as much as you like, but you’d 
be losing so much resolution it wouldn’t be worth it, really 
it wouldn’t. Just look around you; Geoffrey. Have a nice 
look, and see who’s here.” 


630 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


Pirate is surprised to find Sir Stephen Dodson-Truck 
more fit than he ever looked in his life. The man is actively 
at peace, in the way of a good samurai—each time he en- 
gages Them fully expecting to die, without apprehension 
or remorse. It is an amazing change. Pirate begins to feel 
hope for himself. “When did you tum?” He knows Sir 
Stephen won’t be offended at his asking. “How did it 
happen?” 

“Oh, no, don’t let this one fool you?” who in the world 
is this, with this greasy pompadour combed nearly as high 
again as his face, through which shows the peened, the 
tenderized soul of a fighter who’s not only taken dives, but 
also thought heavily about them all the way down, It is 
Jeremiah (“Merciful”) Evans, the well-known political in- 
former from Pembroke. “No, our little Stevie’s not ready 
for sainthood quite yet, are we my fine chap?” Slapping 
him, playful, clubbing slaps on the cheek: “Eh? eh? eh?” 

“Not if they’ve thrown me in wiv v’ likes o” you,” replies 
the knight, churlishly. But it’s hard to say really who’s 
provoking whom, for Merciful Evans now bursts into 
song, and a terrible singer he is, a discredit to his people, 
in fact— , 

Say a prayer for the common informer, 

He came out of a quim, just like yoooouo— 
Yes be kind what you chortle, 

For narks are as mortal 

As any, Kilkenny to Kew... 

And the next time you sigh in your comfort, 
Ask yourself how he’s doing, today— 

Is it worse being sold, 

For those handfuls of gold, ; 

Than to sigh all your real-life, away? 


“I don’t know that I’m going to like it in here,” Pirate, 
an unpleasant suspicion growing on him, looking about 
nervously, 

“The worst part’s the shame,” Sir Stephen tells him. 
“Getting through that. Then your next step—well, I talk 
like an old hand, but that’s really only as far as I’ve come, 
up through the shame. At the moment I’m involved with 
the ‘Nature of Freedom’ drill you know, wondering if any 
action of mine is truly my own, or if I always do only what 


1 RS 
+ 


7 


In the Zone 631 


_ They want me to do... regardless of what I believe, you 
see...Ive been given the old Radio-Control-Implanted- 
In-The-Head-At-Birth problem to mull over—as a kind of 
koan, I suppose. It’s driving me really, clinically insane. I 
rather imagine that’s the whole point of it. And who 
knows what comes nextP Good God. I don’t find out, of 
course, till I break through this one. :.. I don’t mean to 
discourage you so soon—” 

“No, no, I've been wondering something else—are all 
you lot my Group or something? Have I been assigned 
here?” 

“Yes. Are you beginning to see why?” - 

“Tm afraid I am.” With everything else, these are, after 
all, people who kill each other: and Pirate has always been 
one of them. “I'd been hoping for—oh, it’s foolish, a bit 
of mercy... but I was at the all-night cinema, around the 
corner from Gallaho Mews, the intersection with the extra 
street, the one you can’t always see because it comes in.at 
such a strange angle... I had a bad stretch of time to get 
through, poison, metallic time... it smelled as sour as a 
burned pot... all I wanted was a place to sit a while, and 
they don’t care who you are really, what you eat or how 
long you sleep or who—whom you get together with. ...” 

“Prentice, really it’s all right,” it’s St.-Just Grossout, 
whom the others call “Sam Juiced” when they want ‘to 
shout him down, during the passages in here when there 
is nothing for it but a spot of rowdyism. 

“IT... just can’t...I mean if it is true, then,” a laugh 
| it hurts him, deep in his windpipe, to make, “then I de- 
. fected for nothing, didn’t IP I mean, if I haven’t really 

defected at all... .” 

The word reached him during a government newsreel. 
FROM CLOAK-AND-DAGGER TO CROAK-AND-STAG- 
GER, the sequin title twinkled to all the convalescent souls 
gathered for another long night of cinema without sched- 

_ ule—shot of a little street-crowd staring in a dusty show- 
window, someplace so far into the East End that no one 
except those who lived there had ever heard of it... 

_ bomb-tilted ballroom floor of the ruin slipping uphill be- 
| hind like a mountain meadow, but dodgy as a trampoline 
~ to walk upon, conch-twisting stucco columns tiled inward, 

7 brass elevator cage drooping from the overhead. Right out 


632 Gravity’s Rainsow 


in front was a half-naked, verminous and hairy creature, 
approximately human, terribly pale, writhing behind the 
crumbled remains of plate glass, tearing at sores on his 
face and abdomen, drawing blood, scratching and picking 
with dirt-black fingernails. “Every day in Smithfield 
Market, Lucifer Amp makes a spectacle of himself. That’s 

\not so surprising. Many a demobilized soldier and sailor has 
turned to public service as a means of keeping at least 
body and soul together, if nothing else. What is unusual is 
that Mr. Amp used to work for the Special Operations 
Executive... .” 

“It's quite good fun, actually,” as the camera moves in 
for a close-up of this individual, “only took me a week to 
pick up the knack of it....” 

“Do you feel a sense of belonging now, that you hadn’t 
when you came, or—have they still not accepted you out 
here?” 

“They—oh the people, the people have been just won- 
derful. Just grand. No, no problems there at all.” 

At which point, from the bishopwise seat behind Pirate, 
came an alcohol smell, and warm breath, and a pat on the 
shoulder. “You hear? ‘Used to work.’ That’s tich, that is. 
No one has ever left the Firm alive, no one in history— 
and no one ever will,” It was. an upper-class accent, one 
Pirate might have aspired to once in his rambling youth. 
By the time he decided to look back, though, his visitor 
was gone, 

“Think of it as a handicap, Prentice, like any other, like 
missing a limb or having malaria... one can still live . 
one learns to get round it, it becorties part of the day—” 

“Being a d—” 

“It’s all right. “Being a—?” 

“Being a double agent? ‘Got round’?” He looks at the 
others, computing. Everyone here seems to be at letistra a 
double agent. 

“Yes... you're down here now, down here with us,” 
whispers. Sammy. “Get your shame and your sniffles all out 
of the way, young fellow, because we don’t make a prac- 
tice of indulging that for too long.” 

“It’s a shadow,” cries Pirate, ert working iid a 
shadow, forever.” é 

“But think of the free-dom?” sez Merciful Evans, “I 


In the Zone - 633 


can’t even trust myself? can I. How much freer than that 
can a man be? If he’s to be sold out by anyone? even by 
himself you see?” : 

“I don’t want that—’ 

“You don’t have a choice,” Dodson-Truck replies. “The 
Firm know perfectly well that you’ve come here. They'll 
expect a full report from you now. Either voluntary or 
some other way.” 

“But I wouldn’t...I’d never tell them—” The smiles 
they are putting on for him now are deliberately cruel, to 

’ help him through it a bit. “You don’t, you really don’t trust 
me?” 

“Of course not,” Sammy sez. “Would you—really—trust 

any of us?” 

“Oh, no,” Pirate whispers. This is one of his own in 
progress. Nobody else’s. But it’s still a passage They can 
touch quite as easily as that of any client. Without expect- 
ing to, it seems Pirate has begun to cry. Odd. He has never 

_ cried in public like this before. But he understands where 
he is, now. It will be possible, after all, to die in obscurity, 
without having helped a soul: without love, despised, never 
trusted, never vindicated—to stay down among the Pret- 
erite, his poor honor lost, impossible to locate or to 
redeem. 

__ He is crying for persons, places, and things left behind: 
for Scorpia Mossmoon, living in St. John’s Wood among 
sheet-music, new recipes, a small kennel of Weimaraners 
whose racial purity she will go to extravagant lengths to 
preserve, and husband Clive who shows up now and then, 
Scorpia living only a few minutes away by Underground 
but lost to Pirate now for good, no chance for either of 
them to turn again... for people he had to betray in the 
course of business for the Firm, Englishmen and foreigners, 
for Ion so naive, for Gongylakis, for the Monkey Girl and 

the pimps in Rome, for Bruce who got burned... for 
nights up in partisan mountains when he was one with the 
smell of living trees, in full love with the at last undeniable 

beauty of the night... for a girl back in the Midlands 
named Virginia, and for their child who never came to 

' pass... for his dead mother, and his dying father, for the 

innocent and the fools who are going to trust him, poor 

' faces doomed as dogs who have watched us so amiably 


) 


a a 


634 Graviry’s Ramnsow 


from behind the wire fences at the city pounds... cries 
for the future he can see, because it makes him feel so 
desperate and cold. He is to be taken from high moment 
to high moment, standing by at meetings of the Elect, 
witnessing a test of the new Cosmic Bomb—“Well,” a wise 
old face, handing him the black-lensed glasses, “there’s 
\ your Bomb ...” turning then to see its thick yellow explod- 
ing down the beach, across the leagues of Pacific waves... 
touching famous assassins, yes actually touching their 
human hands and faces... finding out one day how long 
ago, how early in the game the contract on his own life 
was let. No one knows exactly when the hit will come— 
every morning, before the markets open, out before the 
milkmen, They make Their new update, and decide on 
what’s going to be sufficient unto the day. Every morning 
Pirate’s name will be on a list, and one moming it will be 
close enough to the top. He tries to face it, though it fills 
him with a terror so pure, so cold, he thinks for a minute 
he'll pass out. Later, having drawn back a bit, gathering 
heart for the next sortie, it seems to him he’s done with the 
shame, just as Sir Stephen said, yes past the old shame 
and scared now, full of worry for nothing but his own ass, 
his precious, condemned, personal ass. 

“Ts there room here for the dead?” He hears the ques- 
tion before he can see her asking it. He isn’t sure how she 
came into this room. From all the others now flow impres- 
sions of male jealousy, a gruff sort of women-on-ships-is- 
bad-luck chill and withdrawal. And here’s Pirate left alone 
with her and her question. He holds out to her the ball of 
taffy he’s been carrying, boobish as young Porky Pig hold- 
ing out the anarchist’s ticking bomb to him. But there’s to 
be no sweetness. They are here instead to trade some pain 
and a few truths, but all in the distracted style of the 
period: 

“Come now,” what sort of idiotic trouble does she think 
she’s in now? “you're not dead. I'll wager nt even figura- 
tively so.” 

“I meant, would I be allowed to bring “ dead in with 
me,” Katje explains, “They are my credentials, after all.” 

“I rather liked Frans van der Groov. Your ancestor. The 
dodo chap.” 

It’s not quite what she meant by her dead. “I mean the 


In the Zone 635 


ones who owe their deadness directly.to me. Besides, if 
Frans were ever to walk in here you’d only stand around, 
‘all of you, making sure he understood just how guilty he 
was. The poor man’s world held an inexhaustible supply of 
dodoes—why teach him about genocide?” 

“You could tell him a thing or two about that, couldn’t 
you, girly?” sneers Evans, the tone-deaf Welsh stoolie. 

Pirate is moving against Evans, forearms out from his 
sides saloon-fighter-style, when Sir Stephen intervenes: 
“There'll be talk like. this all the time, Prentice, we're a 
case-hardened lot. You’d better start learning to make it 
work for you here. No telling how long were in for, is 
there? The young woman has grown herself all the pro- 
tection she needs, it seems to me. She doesn’t want you to 
fight for her.” | 

Well, he’s right. She’s put her warm hand on Pirate’s 
arm, shaking her head twice with embarrassed small 
laughs, “I’m glad. to see you anyway, Captain Prentice.” 

“No one else is. Think about it.” 

She only raises her eyebrows. It was a shitty thing to 
say. Remorse, or some late desire to be pure, rush into his 
blood like dope. 

“But—” astonished to feel himself beginning to collapse, 
like a stack of rifles, around her feet, caught in her gravita- 
tion, distances abolished, waveforms unmeasurable, “Katje 
... 4f I could never betray you—” 

He has fallen: she has lost her surface. She is staring at 

“Even if the price for that were... betraying others, 
hurting... or killing others—then it wouldn’t matter who, 
or how many, no, not if I could be your safety, Katje, your 
perfect—” 

_ — “But those, those are the sins that might never happen.” 
Here they are bargaining like a couple of pimps. Do they 
have any idea what they sound like? “That’s easy enough 
to pledge, doesn’t cost you a thing.” 

“Then even the sins I did commit,” he protests, “yes 
I'd do them over—” . 

“But you can’t do that, either—so, you get off just as 

_ cheap. Hm?” : . 

“T can erence patterns,” more grim than she really wants 

im to be. > 


ie 


636 Gravity's RAINBOW 


“Oh, think...” her fingers are lightly in his hair, “think 
of the things you've done. Think of all your ‘credentials,’ 
and all of mine—” 

“But that’s the only medium we've got now,” he cries, 

ay gift for bad faith. We'll have to build everything with 
. deal it, as the prosecutors deal you your freedom.” 

. “Philosopher.” She is smiling. “You were never like 

that.” i 

“It must have come from always being in motion. I’ve 
never felt this stillness... .” They are touching now, with- 
out urgency, still, neither of them, quite over the surprise. 
... My little brother” (Pirate understands the connection 
she has made) “left home at 18. I liked to watch him 
sleeping at night. His long eyelashes...so innocent... I 
watched for hours.... He got as far as Antwerp. Before 
long he was loitering around parish churches with the rest 
of them. Do you know what I mean? Young, Catholic 
males. Camp followers. They got to depend on alcohol, 
many of them, at an early age. They would choose a 
particular priest, and become his faithful dog—literally 
wait all night at his doorstep in order to talk to him fresh 
from his bed, his linen, the intimate smells that had not yet 
escaped the folds of his garment... insane jealousies, 
daily jostling for position, for the favors of this Father or 
that. Louis began to attend Rexist meetings. He went out 
to a-soccer field and heard Degrelle tell the crowd that 
they must let themselves be swept away by the flood, they 
must act, act, and let the rest take care of itself. Soon my 
brother was out in the street with his broom, along with 
the other guilty sarcastic young men with their brooms in 
their hands... and then he had joined Rex, the ‘realm of 
total souls,’ and the last I heard he was in Antwerp living 
with an older man named Philippe. I lost track of him. 


We were very close at one time. People took us for twins. — 


When the heavy rocket attacks began against Antwerp I 
knew it could not be an accident. .. .” 

Yes well Pirate’s Chapel himself, “But ‘Pve wondered 
about the solidarity of your Church . . . you) kneel, and she 
takes care of you... when you are acting politically, to 
have all that common momentum, taking you upward—” 

“You never had that either, did you.” She’s been py 
really at him—“none of the marvelous excuses. We dic 
everything ourselves.” 


In the Zone 637 


_ No, there’s no leaving shame after all—not-down here— 
it has to be swallowed sharp-edged and ugly, and lived 
with in pain, every day. 

Without considering, he is in her arms. ‘Tt isn’t for com- 
fort. But if he is to keep dragging himself up the ratchet’s 
teeth one by one he does need to pause in human touch 
for a bit. “What did it look like out there, Katje? I saw an 
organized convention. Someone else saw it as a gar- 
den... .” But he knows what she'll say. 

“There was nothing out there. It was a barren place. 
I'd been most of the day looking for a sign of life. Then 
at last I heard you all in here.” So they have wandered to 
a balcony, a graceful railing, no one can see them from 
inside or out: and below them in the streets, streets they 
have both lost now, are the People. There passes for 
Pirate and Katje a brief segment of a much longer chron- 
icle, the anonymous How I Came to Love the People. “Her 
name was Brenda; her face’ was the bird under the pro- 
tecting grin of the car in the rain that morming, she knelt 
and performed fellatio on me, and I ejaculated on her 
breasts. Her name was Lily, she was 67 last August, she 
reads off the labels of beer bottles to herself out loud, we 
coupled in the standard English position, and she patted 
me on the back and whispered, “Good friend.’ His name 
was Frank, his hair curled away from his face, his eyes 
were rather sharp but pleasant, he stole from American 
Army depots, he bum-fucked me and when he came in- 
side me, so did I. Her name was Frangibella, she was 

_ black, her face was broken out, she wanted. money for 
dope, her openness was a viper writhing in my heart, I 

_ performed cunnilingus upon her. His name was Allan, his 
_ buttocks were tanned, I said, where did you find the sun, 
he answered, the sun is just around the corner, I held him 
over the pillow and buggered him and he cried with love 
till I; my piston pungently greased, exploded at last. Her 
name was Nancy, she was six, we went behind a wall 
near a crater full of ruins, she rubbed and rubbed against 
me, her milky little thighs reaching in and out of my own, 
her eyes were closed, her fair little nostrils moved upward, 

' backward forever, the slope of debris rushed down, steeply, 
_ just beside us, we teetered at the edge, on and on, ex- 
_ quisitely. Her name was—” well, all these and many more 
pass for our young couple here, enough to make them 


a 


638 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


understand that horny Anonymous’s intentions are nothing 
less than a megalomaniac master plan of sexual love with 
every individual one of the People in the World—and 
that when every one, somewhat miraculously, is accounted 
for at last, that will be a rough definition of “loving the 
People.” 
“Take that, you frauds out there in the Branches,” Pirate 
‘wants to strike a humorous note, but doesn’t. He is holding 
Katje now as if, in a moment, music will start, and they 
would dance. 
“But the People will never love you,” she whispers, “ 

me. However bad and good are arranged for them, we will 
always be bad. Do you know where that puts us?” 

He does smile, crookedly as a man being theatrical about 
something for the very first time. Knowing it for a movie 
there’s to be no going back from, in the same terminal class 
as reaching for a gun, he turns his face upward, and looks 
up through all the faintly superimposed levels above, the 
milieux of every sort of criminal soul, every unpleasant 
commercial color from aquamarine to beige, desolate as 
sunlight on a day when you'd rather have rain, all the 
clanging enterprise and bustle of all those levels, extending 
further than, Pirate or Katje can see for thé moment, ‘he 
lifts his long, his guilty, his permanently enslaved face to 
the illusion of sky, to the reality of pressure and weight 
from’ overhead, the hardness and absolute cruelty of it, 
while she presses her own face into the easy lowland be- 
tween his shoulder and pectoral, a look on her face of 
truce, of horror come to a détente with, and as a sunset 
proceeds, the kind that changes the faces of buildings to 
light gray for a while, to an ashy soft chaff of light bleat- 
ing over their outward curves, in the strangely forgelike 
glow in the west, the anxiety of pedestrians staring in the 
tiny storefront window at the dim goldsmith behind his 
fire at his work and paying them no attention, afraid be- 
cause the light looks like it’s going to go away forever this 
time, and more afraid because the failure of light is not a 
private thing, everyone else in the street has seen it too... 
as it grows darker, the orchestra inside this room does, as a 
matter of fact, strike up a tune, dry and astringent... and 
candelabra have been lighted after all... there is Veal 
Florentine ripening in the ovens tonight, there are drinks 
on the House, and drunks in the hammocks, . 


In the Zone 639 


And all the world’s busy, this twi-lightl 
Who knows what morning-streets, our shoes have known? 
Who knows, how many friends, we’ve left, to cry alone? 
We have a moment together, 
We'll hum this tune for a day... 

_Ev’ryone’s dancing, in twi-light, 
Dancing the bad dream a-way.... 


And they do dance: though Pirate never could before, 
very well... they feel quite in touch with all the others as 
they move, and if they are never to be at full ease, still it’s 
not parade rest any longer...so they dissolve now, into 
the race and swarm of this dancing Preterition, and their 
faces, the dear, comical faces they have put on for this 
ball, fade, as innocence fades, grimly flirtatious, and striving 
to be kind. ... 


O 


Fog thickens down the throats of the narrow gassen. In the 
air is a a smell_of salt water. The cobbled streets are wet 
with last night’s rain. Slothrop wakes up in a burned-out 
locksmith’s shop, under racks of sooty keys whose locks 
have all been lost. He stumbles out, finds a pump in a 
courtyard between brick walls and casement windows no- 
body stares out of, puts his head under the spout and 
pumps the pump, soaking his head for as long as he thinks 
he needs to. A ginger cat, meowing for breakfast, comes 
stalking him, doorway to doorway. “Sorry, Ace.” Doesn't 
look like breakfast for either of them. 

. He hitches up Tchitcherine’s pants and heads out of 
town, leaving the blunt towers, the domes of copper cor- 
roded green swimming up in the mist, the high gables and 
red tiles, gets a ride with a woman driving an empty farm 
- wagon. The horse’s sandy forelock bobs and blows, and 

the fog settles in behind. 
This morning it looks like what Vikings must have seen, 
sailing this great water-meadow south, clear to Byzantium, 
all eastern Europe their open sea: the farmland rolls gray 
and green as waves... ponds and lakes seem to have no 
clear boundaries... the sight of other people against this 
ocean sky, even ike een comes welcome as sails after 

-, long days of passage. . 


640 Gravity’s Rarinsow 


The Nationalities are on the move. It is a great frontier- 
less streaming out here. Volksdeutsch from across the 
Oder, moved out by the Poles and headed for the camp 
at Rostock, Poles fleeing the Lublin regime, others going 
back home, the eyes of both parties, when they do meet, 
hooded behind cheekbones, eyes much older than what's 
forced them into moving, Estonians, Letts, and Lithuanians 
‘trekking north again, all their wintry wool in dark bundles, 
shoes in tatters, songs too hard to sing, talk pointless, 
Sudetens and East Prussians shuttling between Berlin and 
the DP camps in Mecklenburg, Czechs and Slovaks, Croats 
and Serbs, Tosks and Ghegs, Macedonians, Magyars, 
Vlachs, Circassians, Spaniols, Bulgars stirred and streaming 
over the surface of the Imperial cauldron, colliding, shear- 
ing alongside for miles, sliding away, numb, indifferent to 
all momenta but the deepest, the instability too far below 
their itchy feet to give a shape to, white wrists and ankles 
incredibly wasted poking from their striped prison-camp 
pajamas, footsteps light as waterfowl’s in this inland dust, 
caravans of Gypsies, axles or linchpins failing, horses dy- 
ing, families leaving the vehicles beside the roads for 
others to come live in a night, a day, over the white hot 
Autobahns, trains full of their own hanging off the cars 
that lumber overhead, squeezing aside for army convoys 
when they come through, White Russians sour with pain 
on the way west, Kazakh ex-P/Ws marching east, Wehr- 
macht veterans from other parts of old Germany, foreign- 
ers to Prussia as any Gypsies, carrying their old: packs, 
wrapped in the army blankets they kept, pale green farm- 
worker triangles sewn chest-high on each blouse bobbing, 
drifting, at a certain hour of the dusk, like candleflames in 
religious procession—supposed to be heading today for 
Hannover, supposed to pick potatoes along the way, 
they’ve been chasing these nonexistent potato fields now 
for a month—“Plundered,” a one-time bugler limps along 
with a long splinter of railroad tie for a cane, his instru- 
ment, implausibly undented and shiny, swinging from 
one'shoulder, “stripped by the SS, Bruder, ja, every fucking 
potato field, and what for? Alcohol. Not to drink, no, 
alcohol for the rockets. Potatoes we could! have been eat- 
ing, alcohol we could have been drinking. It’s unbeliey- 
able.” “What, the rockets?” “Nol The SS, picking pota- 


In the Zone 641 


toes!” looking around for his laugh. But there are none 
here to follow the brass and flourish of his less solemn 
heart. They were infantrymen, and know how to snooze 
between footfalls—at some hour of the morning they will 
fall out by the side of the road, a moment’s precipitate out 
of the road chemurgy of these busy nights, while the in- 
visible boiling goes on by, the long strewn vortices— 
pinstripe suits with crosses painted on the back, ragged 
navy and army uniforms, white turbans, mismatched socks 
or none, Tattersall dresses, thick-knitted shawls with babies 
inside, women in army trousers split at the knees, flea- 
bitten and barking dogs that run in packs, prams piled 
high with light furnishings in scarred veneer, hand-— 
mortised drawers that will never fit into anything again, 
looted chickens alive and dead, horns and violins in weath- 
ered black cases, bedspreads, harmoniums, grandfather 
clocks, kits full of tools for carpentry, watchmaking, 
leatherwork, surgery, paintings of pink daughters in white 
frocks, of saints bleeding, of salmon and purple sunsets 
over the sea, packs stuffed with beady-eyed boas, dolls 
smiling out of violently red lips, Allgeyer soldiers an inch 
and a quarter to the man painted cream, gold and blue, 
handfuls of hundred-year-old agates soaked in honey that 
sweetened greatgrandfather tongues long gone to dust, 
then into sulfuric acid to char the sugar in bands, brown 
to black, across the stone, deathless piano performances 
_ punched on Vorsetzer rolls, ribboned black lingerie, flow- 
ered and grape-crested silverware, faceted lead-glass de- 
canters, tulip-shaped Jugendstil cups, strings of amber 
| beads . . . so the populations move, across the open 
meadow, limping, marching, shuffling, carried, hauling 
along the detritus of an order, a European and bourgeois 
_ order they don’t yet know is destroyed forever. 

When Slothrop has cigarettes he’s an easy mark, when 
somebody has food they share it—sometimes a batch of 

_ vodka if there’s an army concentration nearby, the GI cans 
can be looted for all kinds of useful produce, potato peels, 
melon rinds, pieces of candy bars for sugar, no telling 
what's going to go into these DP stills, what you end up 
g is the throwaway fraction, of some occupying 

wer. Slothrop drifts in and out of dozens of these quiet, 
hungry, scuffling migrations, each time getting hard Benze- 


642 Gravity’s Rainsow — 


drine jitters off of the faces—there aren’t any he can really 
ignore, is the problem, they’re all too strong, like faces of 
a racetrack crowd, each one urging No, me—look at me, 
be touched, reach for your camera, your weapon, your 
cock.... He’s stripped all the insignia off Tchitcherine’s 
uniform, trying for less visibility, but very few people 
. seem to care much about insignia, ... 

\. Much of the time he’s alone. He'll come on farmhouses, 
deserted in the night, and will sleep in the hay, or if 
there’s a mattress (not often) ina bed. Wake to sun glit- 
tering off some small lake surrounded by green salted with 
blossoms of thyme or mustard, a salad hillside, sweeping 
up to pines in the mist. Sapling tomato-frames and purple 
foxgloves in the yards, huge birds’ nests built up under 
the eaves of the thatched roofs, bird-choruses in the morn- 
ing, and soon, one day, as the summer turns ponderously 
in the sky, the clang of cranes, on the move. 

At a farmhouse in a river valley far south of Rostock, 
he comes in to shelter out of the midday rain, falls asleep 
in a rocking-chair on the porch, and dreams about Tantivy 
Mucker-Maffiick, his friend from long ago. He has come 
back, after all and against the odds. It’s somewhere out in 
the country, English country, quilted in darkened green 
and amazingly bright straw-yellow, of very old standing 
rocks on high places, of early indenture to death and taxes, 
of country girls who walk out at night to stand naked on 
the tor and sing. Members of Tantivy’s family and many 
friends have come, all in a mood of quiet celebrating, be- 
cause of Tantivy’s return. Everybody understands it’s only 
a visit: that he will be “here” only in a conditional way. 
At some point it will fall apart, from thinking about it too 
much, There is a space of lawn cleared for dancing, with 
a village band and many of the women dressed in white. 
After a spell of confusion about the day’s schedule of 
events, the meeting takes place—it seems to be under- 
ground, not exactly a grave or erypt, nothing sinister, 
crowded with relatives and friends around Tantivy who 
looks so real, so untouched by time, very clear and full of 
color... “Why, Slothrop.” | e: 

“Oh—where’ve you been, gate?” \ 

rer ‘Here.’ ” i ; js ! 
“ae “Here” > P” 


In the Zone 643 


“Yes, like that, you've got it—once or twice removed 
like that, but I walked in the same streets as you, read the 
same news, was narrowed to the same spectrum of 
colors... .” 

“Then didn’t you—” 

“I didn’t do anything. There was a change.” 

The colors in here—stone facing, flowers worn by 
guests, the strange chalices on the tables—carry an under- 
breath of blood spilled and turned black, of gentle car- 
bonizing in the blank parts of the cities at four o’clock on 
Sunday afternoon ... it makes crisper the outlines of Tan- 
tivy’s suit, rather a gigolo suit of unspeakably foreign 
cut, certainly nothing he ever would have thought of wear- 
ing.... 

“I guess we don’t have much time...I know this is 
shitty, and really selfish but I'm so alone now, and...I 
heard that just after it happens, sometimes, you'll sort of 
hang around for a while, sort of look after a friend who's 
‘here.’ 

“Sometimes.” He is smiling: but his serenity and dis- 
tance are the stretch of an impotent cry past Slothrop’s 
reach. 

“Are you ooking after me?” | 

“No, Slothrop. Not you. . 

Slothrop sits ee the old weathered rocker looking out at 
a rolling line of hills and the sun just come down out of 
the last of the rainclouds, turning the wet fields and the 
haycocks to gold. Who passed by and saw his sleeping, his 
face white and troubled nodded on the breast of his muddy 
uniform? 

As he moves on he finds these farms haunted, but 
- amiably. The oakwork creaks in the night, honest and 
wooden. Unmilked cows low painfully in distant fields, 

others come in and get drunk on fermented silage, barging 

_ around into the fences and piles of hay where Slothrop 
' dreams, uttering moos with drunken umlauts on them. 
Up on the rooftops the black and white storks, long throats 
_ eurved to the sky, heads upside down and looking back- 
_ wards, clatter their beaks in greeting and love. Rabbits 
me scurrying at night to eat whatever's good in the 
aes Trees, now—Slothrop’s intensely alert to trees, 
_ finally. When he comes in among trees he will spend time 


644 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


touching them, studying them, sitting very quietly near 
them and understanding that each tree is a creature, 
carrying on its individual life, aware of what’s happening 
around it, not just some hunk of wood to be cut down. 
Slothrop’s family actually made its money killing trees, 
amputating them from their roots, chopping them up, 
grinding them to pulp, bleaching that to paper and getting 
“paid for this with more paper. “That’s really insane.” He 
shakes his head. “There’s insanity in my family.” He looks 
up. The trees are still. They know he’s there. They prob- 
ably also know what he’s thinking. “I’m sorry,” he tells 
them. “I can’t do anything about those people, they’re all 
out of my reach. What can I do?” A medium-size pine 
nearby nods its top and suggests, “Next time you come 
across a logging operation out here, find one of their 
tractors that isn’t being guarded, and take its oil filter 
with you. That’s what you can do.” 


Partial List of Wishes on Evening Stars for This Period: 


Let me find that chicken coop the old lady told me about. 

Let Tantivy really be alive. 

Let this fucking zit on my back go away. 

Let me go to Hollywood when this is over so that ‘Rita 
Hayworth can see me and fall in love with me. 

Let the peace of this day be here tomorrow when I wake up. 

Let that discharge be waiting for me in Cuxhaven. 

Let Bianca be all right, a-and— 

Let me be able to take a shit soon. 

Let that only be a meteor falling. 

Let these boots hold out at least to Liibeck. 

Let that Ludwig find his lemming and be happy and leave 
me in peace. 


Well, Ludwig. Slothrop finds him one morning by the 
shore of some blue anonymous lake, a surprisingly fat kid 
of eight or nine, gazing into the water, crying, shuddering 
all over in rippling fat-waves. His lemming’s name is 
Ursula, and she has run away from home. Ludwig’s been 
chasing her all the way north from Pritzwalk. He’s pretty 
sure she’s heading for the Baltic, but he’s afraid shell 
mistake one of these inland lakes for the sea, and jump 
into that instead— rat 

“One lemming, kid?” 


In the Zone 645 


ve had her for two years.” he sobs, “she’s been fine, 
she’s never tried to— I don’t know. Something just came 
over her.” 

“Quit fooling. Lemmings never do anything alone. They 
need a crowd. It gets contagious. You see, Ludwig, they 
overbreed, it goes in cycles, when there are too many of 
them they panic and run off looking for food. I learned 
that in college, so I know what I'm talking about. Harvard. 
Maybe that. Ursula’s just out after a boy friend or some- 
thing.” 

“She would. have let me know.” 
‘Tm sorry.” 

“Russians aren’t sorry about eee! 

“Tm not a Russian.” 

“Is that why you took off all: your insigniar” 

They look at each other. “Uh, well; you need a hand 
finding that lemming?” 

This Ludwig, now, may not be completely Right in the 
Head. He is apt to drag Slothrop up out of sleep in the 
middle of the night, waking half the DP encampment, 
spooking the dogs and babies, absolutely sure that ‘Ursula 
is out there, just beyond the circle of the fire, looking in at 
him, seeing him but not the way she used to. He leads 
Slothrop into detachments of Soviet tankers, into heaps of 
ruins high-crested as the sea, that collapse around. and, 
given a chance, on top of you the minute you step in, 
also into sucking marshes where the reeds pull away in 
your fingers when you try to grab them, and the smell is 
of protein disaster. This is either maniac faith, or some- 
thing a little darker: it does dawn on Slothrop at last that 
if there’s any impulse to suicide around here it ain’t Ur- 
sula’s, it’s that Ludwig’s—why, the lemming may not even 
exist. : 
Still... hasn’t Slothrop, once or twice, seen something? 
scooting along ahead down gray narrow streets lined with 
token saplings in one or another of these Prussian garri- 
son-towns, places whose whole industry and meaning was 
soldiering, their barracks and stone walls deserted now— . 
or-or crouching by the edge of some little lake, watching 
clouds, white sails of gaff-riggers against the other: shore 
‘so green, foggy, and far away, getting secret instruction 
from waters whose’ movements in lemming-time are oce- _ 


646 Gravity's RAINBOW 


anic, irresistible, and slow ae solid-looking enough at 
least to walk out on safely. . 

“That’s what Jesus meant,” whispers the ghost of Slo- 
strop’s first American ancestor William, “venturing out on 
the Sea of Galilee. He saw it from the lemming point of 
view. Without the millions who had plunged and drowned, 
there could have been no miracle. The successful loner 
\. was only the other part of it: the last piece to the jigsaw 
puzzle, whose shape had already been created by the 
Preterite, like the last blank space on the table.” 

“Wait a minute. You people didn’t have jigsaw puzzles.” 

“Aw, shit.” 

William Slothrop was a peculiar bird. He took off from 
Boston, heading west in true Imperial style, in 1634 or -5, 
sick and tired of the Winthrop machine, convinced he 
could preach as well as anybody in the hierarchy even if 
he hadn’t been officially ordained. The ramparts of the 
Berkshires stopped everybody else at the time, but not 
William. He just started climbing. He was one of the 
very first Europeans in. After they settled in Berkshire, he 
and his son John got a pig operation going—used to drive 
hogs right back down the great escarpment, back over the 
long pike to Boston, drive them just like sheep or cows. 
By the time they got to market those hogs were so skinny 
it was hardly worth it, but William wasn’t really in it so 
much for the money as just for the trip itself. He enjoyed 
the road, the mobility, the chance encounters of the day— 
Indians, trappers, wenches, hill people—and most of all 
just being with those pigs. They were good company. 
Despite the folklore and the injunctions in his own Bible, 
William came to love their nobility and personal freedom, 
their gift for finding comfort in the mud on a hot day— 
pigs out on the road, in company together, were every- 
thing Boston wasn’t, and you can imagine what the end 
of the journey, the weighing, slaughter and dreary pigless 
return back up into the hills must’ve been like for William. 
Of course he took it as a parable—knew that the squeal- 
ing bloody horror at the end of the pike was in exact 
balance to all their happy sounds, their untroubled pink : 
eyelashes and kind eyes, their smiles, their grace in cross-_ 
country movement. It was a little early for Isaac Newton, 
but feelings about action and reaction were in the air. 


| 


In the Zone 647 


William must've been waiting for the one pig that wouldn’t 
die, that would validate all the ones who'd had to, all his 
Gadarene swine who'd rushed into extinction like lem- 
mings, possessed not by demons but by trust for men, 
which the men kept betraying... possessed by innocence 
they couldn’t lose... by faith in William as another variety 
of pig, at home with the Earth, sharing the same gift of 
life... 

He wrote a long tract about it presently, called On 
Preterition. It had to be published in England, and is 
among the first books to’ve been not only banned but also 
ceremonially burned in Boston. Nobody wanted to hear 
about all the Preterite, the many God passes over when > 
he chooses a few for salvation. William argued holiness 
for these “second Sheep,” without whom there’d be no 
elect. You can bet the Elect in Boston were pissed off 
about that. And it got worse. William felt that what Jesus 
was for the elect, Judas Iscariot was for the Preterite. 
Everything in the Creation has its equal and opposite 
counterpart. How can Jesus be an exception? could we 
feel for him anything but horror in the face of the un- 
natural, the extracreational? Well, if he is the son of man, 
and if what we feel is not horror but love, then we have 
to love Judas too. Right? How William avoided being 
burned for heresy, nobody knows. He must’ve had con- 
nections. They did finally 86 him out of Massachusetts 
Bay Colony—he thought about Rhode Island for a while 
but decided he wasn’t that keen on antinomians either. So 
finally he sailed back to Old England, not in disgrace so 
much as despondency, and that’s where he died, among 
memories of the blue hills, green maizefields, get-togethers 
over hemp and tobacco with the Indians, young women 
in upper rooms with their aprons lifted, pretty faces, hair 
spilling on the wood floors while underneath in the stables 
horses kicked and drunks hollered, the starts in the very 
early mornings when the backs of his herd glowed like 
pearl, the long, stony and surprising road to Boston, the 
rain on the Connecticut River, the snuffling good-nights of 
a hundred pigs among the new stars and long grass still 
warm from the sun, settling down to sleep.... 

Could he have been the fork in the road America never 
took, the singular point she jumped the wrong way from? 


1y 


s 
— 
al fl 


648 Graviry’s RaiInsow 


Suppose the Slothropite heresy had had the time to con- 
solidate and prosper? Might there have been fewer crimes 
in the name of Jesus, and more merey in the name of 
Judas Iscariot? It seems to Tyrone Slothrop that there 
might be a route back—maybe that anarchist he met in 
Ziirich was right, maybe for a little while all the fences 
are down, one road as good as another, the whole space 
of the Zone cleared, depolarized, and somewhere inside 
the waste of it a single set of coordinates from which to 
proceed, without elect, without preterite, without even 
nationality to fuck it up. ... Such are he vistas of thought 
that open up in Slothrop’s head as he tags along after 
Ludwig. Is he drifting, or being led? The only control in 
the picture right now is the damned lemming. If she exists. 
The kid shows Slothrop photos he’s packing in his wallet: 
Ursula, eyes bright and shy, peeking out from under a 
pile of cabbage leaves ... Ursula in a cage decked with a 
giant ribbon and swastika’d seal, first prize in a Hitler 
Youth pet show... Ursula and the family cat, watching 
each other carefully across a tiled stretch of floor... Ur- 
sula, front paws dangling and eyes drowsy, hanging out 
the pocket of Ludwig’s Nazi cub-scout uniform. Some part 
of her is always blurred, too quick for the shutter. Even 
knowing when she was a baby what they'd be in for 
someday, still Ludwig has always loved her. He may be 
thinking that love can stop it from happening. 
Slothrop will never find out. He loses the fat young 
lunatic in a village near the sea. Girls in full skirts and 
flowered kerchiefs are out in the woods gathering mush- 
rooms, and red squirrels flash through the beeches. Streets 
curve on into town, foreshortening too fast—it’s wideangle, 
smalltown space here. Lamps are clustered up on the 
poles. Street cobbles are heavy and sand-colored. Dray- 
horses stand in the sun flourishing their tails. : 
Down an alleyway near the Michaeliskirche, a little 
girl comes tottering under an enormous pile of contraband 
fur coats, only her brown legs visible. Ludwig lets out a 
scream, pointing at the coat on top. Something small and 
gray is worked into its collar. Artificial yellow eyes gleam 
unwholesomely. Ludwig runs hollering} Ursula, Ursula, 
grabbing for the coat. The little girl lets out a flurry of 
curses. H 
“You killed my lemming!” 


In the Zone 649 


“Let go, idiot.” A tug-of-war among the blurry patches 
of sun and shadow in the alley. “It isn’t a lemming, it’s a 
gray fox.” 

Ludwig stops yelling long enough to look. “She’s right,” 
Slothrop points out. 

“{'m sorry,” Ludwig snivels. “I’m a little upset.” 

“Well, could you help me carry these as far as the 

church?” 
“Sure.” 

They each take an armful of furs and follow her through 
the bumpy gassen of the town, in a side entrance, down 
several flights to a subbasement of the Michaeliskirche. 
There in the lamplight, the first face Slothrop sees, in- 
clined over a Sterno fire tending a simmering pot, is ‘that 
of Major Duane Marvy. 


O 


YAAAGGGGHHHH— Slothrop hefts his armload of coats, 
ready to throw them and flee, but the Major’s just all 
smiles. “Hi there, comrade. You're just in time for some 
o Duane Marvy’s Atomic Chili! Whyntcha pull up a pew 
’n’ sit down? Yaah-ha-ha-ha! Little What’s-her-name here,” 
chuckling and copping a feel as the girl deposits her de- 
livery with the enormous stash of furs that occupies most 
of this room, “she’s kind of indiscreet sometimes. I hope 
you don’t feel like that we’ re doing anything illegal, I 
mean in your zone and eve: , 

“Not at all, Major,” trying for a Russain accent, which 

comes out like Bela Lugosi. Marvy is out with his pass 
anyhow, most of which is hand-written, with here and 
there a seal stamped onto it. Slothrop squints at the Cyrillic 
handwriting at the bottom and makes out Tchitcherine’s 
signature. “Ah. I have coordinated with Colonel Tchi- 
tcherine on one or two occasions.” 
_ “Hey’d ya hear what happened up in Peenymunde? 
Buncha ’suckers just come in hijacked Der Springer. right 
out fm under the Colonel’s nose. Yeah. You know Der 
Springer? Bad ass, comrade. That ’sucker got so many 
arns in the far don’t leave much for free-enterprisers like 
me ’n’ old Bloody Chiclitz.” 

Old Bloody Chiclitz, whose mother, Mrs. Chiclitz, named 


™ 
“a 


650 Graviry’s Rainsow 


him Clayton, has been lurking behind a stack of mink 
capes with a .45 aimed at Slothrop’s stomach. “Say he’s 
O.K., buddy,” Marvy calls. “Y’all bring us s’more that 
champagne why don’tcha.” Chiclitz is about as fat as 
Marvy and wears hornrimmed glasses, and the top of his 
‘head’s as shiny as his face. They stand there with their 
arms around each other’s shoulders, two smiling fat men. 
. “Ivan, you're lookin’ at 10,000 calories a day, right here,” 
‘indicating the two paunches with his thumb, and winking. 
“Chiclitz here goam be the Royal Baby,” and they both 
collapse with laughter. But it is true. Chiclitz has actually 
figured out a way to cash in on redeployment. He is about 
to wangle with Special Services. the exclusive contract for 
staging the equator-crossing festivities for every troop ship 
that changes hemispheres. And Chiclitz himself will be 
the Royal Baby on as many as he can, that’s been written 
in. He dreams of the generations of cannon fodder, strug- 
gling forward on their knees, one by one, to kiss his stom- 
ach while he gobbles turkey legs and ice-cream cones and 
wipes his fingers off in the polliwogs’ hair. Officially he is 
one of the American industrialists out here with the 
T-Force, scouting German engineering, secret weaponry 
in particular. Back home he owns a toy factory in Nutley, 
New Jersey. Who can ever forget the enormously success- 
ful Juicy Jap, the doll that you fill with ketchup then 
bayonet through any of several access slots, whereupon 
it flies to pieces, 82 of them, realistically squishy plastic, 
all over the room? or-or Shufflin’ Sam, the game of skill 
where you have to shoot the Negro before he gets back 
over the fence with the watermelon, a challenge to the 
reflexes of boys and girls of all ages? Right now business 
is taking care of itself, but Chiclitz has his eyes on the 
future. That’s why he’s running this fur operation, with 
the Michaeliskirche serving as a depot for the whole 
region. “Retrenchment. Got to get capitalized, enough to 
see me through,” splashing champagne into gold com- 
munion chalices, “till we see which way it’s gonna go. 
Myself, I think there’s a great future in these V-weapons. 
They’re gonna be really big.” 
The old church smells of spilled wine,| American sweat, 
and recently burned cordite, but these are raw newer 
intrusions that haven’t done away with the prevailing 


In the Zone - 651 


Catholic odor—incense, wax, centuries of mild bleating 
from the lips of the flock. Children come in and go out, 
bringing furs and taking them away, chatting with Lud- 
wig and presently inviting him along to check out the 
freight cars down at the marshaling yards. 

There are about 30 kids on Chiclitz’s payroll. “My 
dream;” he admits, “is to bring all these kids back. to 
America, out to Hollywood. I think there’s a future for 
them in pictures. You heard of Cecil B. De Mille, the 
producer? My brother-in-law’s pretty close to him. I think 
I can teach them to sing or something, a children’s 
chorus, negotiate a package deal with De Mille. He can 
use them for the real big numbers, religious scenes, orgy 
scenes—" 

“Ha!” cries Marvy, dribbling champagne, eyeballs bulg- 
ing. “You're dreaming all right, old buddy! You sell those 
kids to Cecil B. De Mille it’s f'damn sure they ain’t goam 
be singin’, He'll use them little ’suckers for galley slaves! 
Yaah-ha-ha—yeah they'll be chained to th’ oars, just 
haulin’ ass, rowin’ old Henry Wilcoxon away into th’ 
sunset to fight them Greeks or Persians or somebody.” 

“Galley slaves?” Chiclitz roars. “Never, by God. For 
De Mille, young fur-henchmen can’t be rowing!” 

Out at the edge of town are the remains of an A4 bat- 
tery, left where it stood as the troops fled south, trying to 
escape British and Russian pincers. Marvy and Chiclitz 
are going to have a look, and Slothrop is welcome to come 
along. But first there is the matter of Duane Marvy’s 
Atomic Chili, which turns out to be a test of manhood. 
The champagne bottle is there within easy reach, but 
drinking from it will be taken as a sign of weakness. Once 
Slothrop would have been suckered in, but now he doesn’t 
even have to think it over. While the two Americans, 
blinded, noses on fire and leaking incredible quantities of 
snot, undergo what the authoritative A Cheapskate’s Guide 
to the Zone aptly describes as “a Gétterd’mmerung of the 
mucous membranes,” Slothrop sits guzzling champagne 
like soda pop, nodding, smiling, and mumbling da, da 
now and then for authenticity’s sake. 

They ride out to the site in a green, grinning Ford staff 
car, Marvy soon as he slides behind the wheel turns into 
a fanged dipsomaniac—eeeeerrrrr leaving rubber enough 


, ae 
“ 
vi 


652 Gravity's Rainsow 


to condom a division, zero to 70 before the echo’s died, 
trying to run down bicyclists right ’n’ left, stampeding the 
livestock, whilst Bloody Chiclitz, whooping happily, a 
champagne bottle in each fist, urges him on—Marvy bel- 
lowing “San Antonya Rose,” his fav’rite song, Chiclitz 
screaming out the window admonitions like “Fuck not 
with the Kid, lest instead of fucker thou become fuckee,” 
which takes a while and draws only a few bewildered 
Fascist salutes from old ladies and little children at the 
roadside. 

The site is a charred patch becoming green with new 
weeds, inside a copse of beech:and some alder. Camou- 
flaged metal stands silent across a ghostly crowd of late 
dandelions, gray heads nodding together waiting for the 
luminous wind that will break them toward the sea, over 
to Denmark, out to all points of the Zone. Everything’s 
been stripped. The vehicles are back to the hollow design 
envelopes of their earliest specs, though there’s still a 
faint odor of petrol and grease. Forget-me-nots are grow- 
ing violent blue violent yellow among the snarl of cables 
and hoses. Swallows have built a nest inside the control 
car, and a spider has begun filling in the web of the 
Meillerwagen boom with her own. “Shit,” sez Major 
Marvy. “Fuckin’ Rooskies done stole everthing, no offense, 
comrade.” They go kicking through green and purple 
weeds, rusted food tins, old sawdust and chips of wood. 
Surveying stakes, each with a tatter of white nailed on 
top, still chain away toward the guide-beam transmitter 
12 kilometers away. Eastward. So it must’ve been the 
Russians they were trying to stop. ... 

Red, white, and blue winks from the dusty deck of the 
control car. Slothrop drops to one knee. The Schwarz- 
kommando mandala: KEZVH. He looks up to see Marvy 
giving him a sly fat smile. 

“Why shore. I shoulda known. You don’t have no in- 
signia on. Sheeeee... you're-you're like th’ Soviet CIC! 
Ain’tcha.” Slothrop stares back. “Hey. Hey, who're you 
tryin’ to git? Huh?” The smile vanishes. “Sa-a-a-y, I shore 
hope it ain’t Colonel Tchitcherine, now, He’s a good 
Rooskie, you know.” ; . 

“I assure you,” holding up the mandala, cross to vam- 
pire, “my only interest is in dealing with the problem of 
these black devils.” : 


In the Zone 653 


Back comes the smile, along with a fat hand on Slo- 
throp’s arm. “You all set to go round ’n’ round with thim, 
whin y’r comrades git here?” 

“Round, and round? I am not sure that I—” 

“You know. Come on. Why all thim boogies’t’s camped 
outside o’ town! Hey, Ivan, god-damn ’at’s goam be fun. 
I spint all day today cleanin’ my Colt’s,” caressing the 
sidearm in its holster. “Goam make me a coonskin cap 
outa one o’ thim ’suckers, ’n’ I don’t have to tell you what 
part’s goam be danglin’ down there in back, do Uh? Hah?” 
Which tickles Bloody Chiclitz so much he like to chokes 
laughing. 

“Actually,” Slothrop making it up as he goes along, 

“my mission is coordinating intelligence,” whatever that 
means, “in operations such as this. I am down here, in 
fact, to reconnoiter the enemy position.” 

“Enemy's right,” Chiclitz nods. “They got guns and 
everything. Only thing a coon beg to have in his hands - 
is a broom!” 

Marvy is frowning. “You, you ain’t expecting us to go 
out there with you, now. We can tell you how to git there, 
comrade, but youre crazy to go out there alone. Why 
don’tcha wait’ll tonight? Scheduled to stort about mid- 
night, ain’t itP You can wait till then.” 

“Tt is essential that I gather certain information in ad- 
vance,” pokerface, pokerface, good, good... “I do not 
have to tell you how important this is.. tar pregnant 
Lugosi pause, “to all of us.” 

Well, that gets him directions out to the Schwarzkom- 
mando and a lift back into town, where the businessmen 
pick up a couple of those Eager Friuleins and go roister- 
ing off into the sunset. Slothrop stands in their exhaust, 
muttering. 

Next time it won't be any custard pie, you asshole. ... 

Takes him an hour to get out to the camp on foot 
across a wide meadow whose color is deepening now as if 
green dye flowed and seeped into its nap... he is aware 
of each single grassblade’s shadow reaching into the shad- 
ows east of it... pure milk-colored light sweeps up in a 
bell-curve above the sun nearly down, transparent white 
flesh, fading up through many blues, powdery to dark 
steel at the zenith... why is he out here, doing this? Is 

.this Ursula the lemming’s idea too, getting mixed up in | 


654 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


other people’s private feuds when he was supposed to 
be... whatever it was... uh.. 

Yeah! yeah what happened to ‘Imipolex G, all that Jamf 
a-and that S-Gerit, s’posed to be a hardboiled private eye 
here, gonna go out all alone and beat the odds, avenge 
my friend that They killed, get my ID back and find that 
. piece of mystery hardware but now aw it’s JUST LIKE— 


LOOK-IN’ FAWR A NEEDLE IN A HAAAAY-STACK! 
Sssss—searchinfrasomethin’ fulla 
(Something) got ta have yooooul 


Feet whispering through weeds and meadow grass, hum- 
ming along exactly the breathless, chin-up way Fred 
Astaire did, reflecting on his chances of ever finding Ginger 
Rogers again this side of their graceful mortality, . 

Then, snapping back—no no, wait, you’re supposed to 
be planning soberly now, weighing your options, deter- 
mining your goals at this critical turning point in your. 

Ya—ta-ta, LOOKIN’ FR A NEEDLE IN A— 

Nonono come on, Jackson, quit fooling, you got to con- 
centrate,... The S-Gerit now—O.K. if I can find that 
S-Gerat ’n’ 1 ee Jamf was hooked in, if I can find that out, 
yeah yeah Imipolex now. 


—searchin’ for a (hmm) cellar full o’ saffron... 


Aw. 

At about which point, as if someone’s simple longing as 
made it appear, comes a single needle-stroke through the 
sky: the first star. 

Let me be able to warn them in time. 

They jump Slothrop among the trees, lean, bearded 
black—they bring him in to the fires where someone is 
playing a thumb- -harp whose soundbox is carved from a 
piece of German pine, whose reeds are cut from springs of 
a wrecked Volkswagen. Women in white cotton skirts 
printed with dark blue flowers, white fee. braided 
aprons, and black kerchiefs are busy with pots and tin- 
ware. Some are wearing ostrich-egg-shell necklaces knife- 
hatched in red and blue. A great cut of beef drips from a 
wooden spit over a fire. 


Inthe Zone 655 


Enzian isn’t there, but Andreas Orukambe is, nervous as 
wire, wearing a navy pullover and army fatigue trousers. 
He remembers Slothrop. “Was ist los?” 

Slothrop tells him. “Supposed to be here at: midnight. 
Don’t know how many there are, but maybe you'd better 
clear out.” 

“Maybe.” Andreas is smiling. “Have you eaten?” 

The argument, go or stay, proceeds over supper. It is 
not the tactical decision-making Slothrop was taught in 
officer school. There seem to be other considerations, some- 
thing the Zone Hereros know about and Slothrop doesn’t. 

“We have to go where we go,” Andreas explains to him 
later. “Where Mukuru wants us to go.” 

“Oh. Oh, I thought you were out here looking for some- 
thing, like everybody else. The ooo00, what about that?” 

“That is Mukuru’s. He hides it where he wants us to 
seek.” Gt: 39] 

“Look, I have a line on that S-Gerit.” He gives them 
Greta Erdmann’s story—the Heath, the gasoline works, the 
name Blicero— 

That rings a bell. A gong, in fact. Everybody looks at 
everybody else. “Now,” Andreas very careful, “that was 
the name of the German who commanded the battery that 
used the S-Gerat?” 

“T don’t know if they used it. Blicero took the woman to 
a factory where it was either put together, or a part of it 
was made, from some plastic called Imipolex G.” 

“And she didn’t say where.” 

“Only ‘the Heath.’ See if you can find her husband, 
Miklos Thanatz. He may have seen the actual firing, if 
there was one. Something out of the ordinary went on 
about then, but I never got to find out what.” 

“Thank you.” 

“It’s O.K. Maybe you can tell me something now.” He 
brings out the mandala he found. “What’s it mean?” 

Andreas sets it on the ground, turns it till the K points 
northwest. “Klar,” touching each letter, “Entliiftung, these 

are the female letters. North letters, In’ our villages the 
women lived in huts on the northern half of the circle, the 
men on the south, The village itself was a mandala. Klar 
is fertilization and birth, Entliiftung is the breath, the soul. 
_Ziindung and Vorstufe are the male signs, the activities, 


‘) 


rn 
eh 
ls a 


656 Graviry’s RaInBow 


fire and preparation or building. And in the center, here, 
Hauptstufe. It is the pen where we kept the sacred cattle. 
The souls of the ancestors. All the same here. Birth, soul, 
fire, building. Male and female, together. 

“The four fins of the Rocket made a cross, another man- 
dala. Number one pointed the way it would fly. Two for 
pitch, three for yaw and roll, four for pitch. Each oppo- 
. site pair of vanes worked together, and moved in opposite 
senses. Opposites together, You can see how we might feel 
it speak to us, even if we don’t set one up on its fins and 
worship it. But it was waiting for us when we came north 
to Germany so long ago... even confused and uprooted 
as we were then, we knew that our destiny was tied up 
with its own. That we had been passed over by von 
Trotha’s army so that we would find the Aggregat.” 

Slothrop gives him the mandala, He hopes it will work 
like the mantra that Enzian told him once, mba-kayere (I 
am passed over), mba-kayere...a spell against Marvy 
tonight, against Tchitcherine. A mezuzah. Safe passage 
through a bad night.... 


oO 4 1 


The Schwarzkommando have got to Achtfaden, but Tchi- 
tcherine has been to Narrisch. It cost him Der Springer 
and three enlisted men in sick bay with deep bites. One 
severed artery. Narrisch trying to go out Audie Murphy 
style. A knight for a bishop—Narrisch under narcohyp- 
nosis raved about the Holy Circle and the Rocketfin Cross, 
But the blacks don’t know what else Narrisch knew: 

(a) there was a radio link from the ground to the S- 
Gerat but not the other way round. 

(b) there was an interference problem between a servo- 
actuator and a special oxygen line running aft to the 
device from the main tank. x 

(c) Weissmann not only coordinated the S-Gerat proj- 
ect at Nordhausen, but also commanded battery that 
fired Rocket 00000. . . 

Total espionage. Bit by bit this ‘mospic is growing. 
Tchitcherine, bureauless, carries it around in his brain. 
Every chip and scrap belongs. More precious than Ra- 


ak a. 


In the Zone 657 


venna, something goes erecting against this starch-colored 
sky, . 

Radio link + oxygen = afterburner of some kind. Ordi- 
narily it would. But Narrisch also spoke of an asymmetry, 
a load inside near vane 3 that complicated roll and yaw 
control almost impossibly. 

Now wouldn’t an afterburner there also give an asym- 
metrical burning pattern, and heat fluxes greater than the 
structure could take? Damn, why hasn’t he picked up any 
of the propulsion people? Do the Americans have them 


Major Marvy, bowie knife in his teeth and two Thomp- 
sons propped on either hip, as dumbfounded in the clear- 
ing as the rest of the attack party, is in no mood to talk. 
Instead he is sulking, and drinking vodka out of Dzaba- 
jev’s bottomless canteen. But had any propulsion engineers 
assigned to the S-Gerit showed up at Garmisch, Marvy 
would have let him know. That’s the arrangement. West- 
ern intelligence, Russian trigger-fingers. 

Oh, he smells Enzian...even now the black may be 
looking in out of the night. Tchitcherine lights a cigarette, 
greenbluelavender flare settling to yellow...he holds the 
flame longer than necessary, thinking let him. He won't. 
I wouldn't. Well... maybe I would. ... 

But it’s come a quantum-jump closer tonight. They are 
going to meet. It will be over the S-Gerit, real or fanta- 
ar working or wasted—they will meet face to face. 
Then. 

hisiankiies who’s the mysterious Soviet intelligence 
agent that Marvy talked to? Paranoia for you here, Tchi- 
tcherine. Maybe Moscow’s been tipped to your vendetta. 
If they are gathering evidence for a court-martial, it won't 
be any Central Asia this time. It'll be Last Secretary to the 
embassy in Atlantis. You can negotiate narcotics arrests for 
all the drowned Russian sailors, expedite your own father’s 
visas to far Lemuria, to the sun-resorts’ of Sargasso where 
the bones come up to lie and bleach and mock the passing 
ships. And just before he rides out on the rioon current, 
brochures tucked between ribs, traveler’s checks wadded 

in a skull-socket, tell him of his black son—tell him about 
‘the day with Enzian in the creeping edge of autumn, cold 
as the mortal cold of an orange kept under shaved ice on 


658 Graviry'sRameow rm 
ca 29 

the terrace of the hotel im Barcelona, si me quieres 
escribir you already know where I'll be staying . . . cold at 
oe of your peeling-thumb, terminally-approaching 
“Listen,” Marvy by now a little drunk and peevish, 
“when we gonna git those ’suckers?” 

\\. “It’s coming, you can be sure.” 


What's this? A political debate now? Not enough bumil- 
iation missing the Schwarzkommando, no, you didn’t think | 


“Yor > Tea iazins base aan peiiaeenaTaa 
doing out here, by the way?” ad ‘ 
A friendly ~ om “4 


In the Zone 659 


_ of GE, full of poison and sluggish hate. Tchitcherine listens 
with only one ear. An episode of vertigo is creeping on 
him. Didn’t Narrisch, under the drug, mention a Siemens 
representative at the S-Gerit meetings in Nordhausen? 
yes. And an IG man, too. Didn’t Carl Schmitz of the IG 
sit on Siemens’s board of directors? 

No use asking Marvy. He is too drunk by now to stay 
on any subject. “Ya know I was purty ignorant whin Uh 
come out here, Sheeit, I used t’think I. G. Farben was 
somebody’s name, you know, a fella—hello, this I. G. 
Farben? No, this is his wife, Mizzus Farben! Yaaah-ha-ha- 
ha!” 

Bloody Chiclitz is off on his Eleanor Roosevelt routine. 
“The othuh day, my son Idiot—uh, Elliot—and I, were 
baking cookies. Cookies to send to the boys overseas. When 
the boys received the cookies we sent them, they would 
bake cookies, and send some back to us. That way, every- 
body gets his cookies!” 

Oh, Wimpe. Old V-Mann, were you right? Is your IG 
to be the very model of nations? 

So it comes to Tchitcherine here in the clearing with 
these two fools on either side of him,-among the debris 
of some numberless battery’s last stand, cables paralyzed 
where winch-operators levered them to stillness, beer bot- 
tles lying exactly where they were thrown by the last men 
on the last night, everything testifying so purely to the 

_ shape of defeat, of operational death. 

“Say, there.” It appears to be a very large white Finger, 
addressing him. Its Fingernail is beautifully manicured: as 
it rotates for him, it slowly reveals a Fingerprint that 
might well be an aerial view of the City Dactylic, that 
city of the future where every soul is known, and there 
is noplace to hide. Right now, joints moving with soft, 
hydraulic sounds, the Finger is calling Tchitcherine’s atten- 
tion to— . 

ik A Rocket-cartel. A structure cutting across every 
agency human and paper that ever touched it. Even to 
Russia... Russia bought from Krupp, didn’t she, from 
‘Siemens, the IG.... ; 
_ Are there arrangements Stalin won’t admit... doesn’t 
even know about? Oh, a State begins to take form in the 
‘Stateless German night, a State that spans oceans and sur- 


. SG 
er 


660 Gravity's Rainsow 


face politics, sovereign as the International or the Church 
of Rome, and the Rocket is its soul. IG Raketen. Circus- 
bright, poster reds and yellows, rings beyond counting, all 
going at once. The stately Finger twirls among them all, 
Tchitcherine is certain. Not so much on outward evidence 
he has found moving through the Zone as out of a per- 
sonal doom he carries with him—always to be held at the 
-edges of revelations. It happened first with the Kirghiz 
Light, and his only illumination then was that fear would 
always keep him from going all the way in. He will never 
get further than the edge of this meta-cartel which has 
made itself known tonight, this Rocket-state whose borders 
he cannot cross. ... 

He will miss the Light, but not the Finger. Sadly, most 
sadly, everyone else seems to be in on it. Every scavenger 
out here is in IG Raketen’s employ. All except for himself, 
and Enzian. His brother, Enzian. No wonder They're after 
the Schwarzkommando... and.... . 

And when They find out I’m not what They think... 
and why is Marvy looking at me like this now, his eyes 
bulging ... oh, don’t panic, don’t feed his insanity, he’s just 
this side of ... of ... 


O ; 


To Cuxhaven, the summer in deceleration, floating on to 
Cuxhaven. The meadows hum. Rain clatters in crescent 
swoops through the reeds, Sheep, and rarely a few dark 
northern deer, will come down to browse for seaweed at 
the shore which is never quite sea nor quite sand, but 
held in misty ambivalence by the sun.... So is 
borne, afloat on the water-leas. Like signals set out for 

travelers, shapes keep repeating for him. Zonal shapes he 
will allow to enter but won’t interpret, not any more. Just 
as well, probably. The most persistent of these, which seem 
to show up at the least real times of the day, are the stair- 
step gables that front so many of these ancient north. 
German buildings, rising, backlit, a strangely wet gray a: 
if risen out of the sea, over these ht and very low 
horizons. They hold shape, they endure, like monument: 
to Analysis, Three hundred years ago mathematicians wer 
learning to break the cannonball’s rise and fall into stair 


bis 


yah In the Zone 661 


steps of range and height, Ax and Ay, allowing them to 
grow smaller and smaller, approaching zero as armies of 
eternally shrinking midgets galloped upstairs and down 
again, the patter of their diminishing feet growing finer, 
smoothing out into continuous sound. This analytic legacy 
has been handed down intact—it brought the tech- 
nicians at Peenemiinde to peer at the Askania films of 
Rocket flights, frame by frame, Ax by Ay, flightless them- 
selves... film and calculus, both pornographies of flight. 
Reminders of impotence and abstraction, the stone Trep- 
pengiebel shapes, whole and shattered, appear now over 
the green plains, and last a while, and go away; in their 
shadows children with hair like hay are playing Himmel 
and Holle, jumping village pavements from heaven to hell 
to heaven by increments, sometimes letting Slothrop have 
a turn, sometimes vanishing back into their dark gassen 
where elder houses, many-windowed and sorrowing, bow 
perpetually to the neighbor across the way, nearly touch- 
ing overhead, only a thin lead of milk sky between, 

At nightfall the children roam the streets carrying round 

paper lanterns, singing Laterne, Laterne, Sonne, Mond und 
Sterne... spheres in country evenings, pale as souls, sing- 
ing good-by to another summer. In a coastal town, near 
Wismar, as he’s falling to sleep in a little park, they sur- 
round Slothrop and tell him the story of Plechazunga, the 
Pig-Hero who, sometime back in the 10th century, routed 
a Viking invasion, appearing suddenly out of a thunder- 
bolt and chasing a score of screaming Norsemen back into 
the sea, Every summer since then, a Thursday has been 
set aside to celebrate the town’s deliverance—Thursday 
being named after Donar or Thor, the thunder-god, who 
sent down the giant pig. The.old gods, even by the 1oth 
century, still had some pull with the people. Donar hadn't 
‘quite been tamed into Saint Peter or Roland, though the 
ceremony did come to be held at the town’s Roland-statue 
near the Peterskirche. . 

This year, though, it’s in jeopardy, Schraub the shoo- 
maker, who has taken the role of Plechazunga for the past 
80 years, got drafted last winter into the Volksgrenadier 
and never came back. Now the white lanterns come crowd- 
‘ing around Tyrone Slothrop, bobbing in the dark. Tiny 
fingers prod his stomach. 


662 Gravity's Rainsow 


“You're the fattest man in the world.” 

“He’s fatter than anyone in the village.” 

“Would you? Would you?” 

“Tm not that fat—” 

“Told you somebody would come.” 

“And taller, too.” 

“—-waitaminute, would I what?” 

“Be Plechazunga tomorrow.” 

“Please,” 

Being a soft touch these days, Slothrop gives in. The} 
roust him up out of his grass bed and down to the city 
hall. In the basement are costumes and props for the 
Schweinheldfest—shields, spears, horned helmets, shaggy 
animal skins, wooden Thor’s hammers and ten-foot light- 
ning bolts covered with gold leaf. The pig costume is a 
little: startling—pink, blue, yellow, bright sour colors, a 
German Expressionist pig, plush outside, padded with 
straw inside, It seems to fit perfectly. Hmm. 

The crowd next morning is sparse and placid: old people 
and children, and a few silent veterans. The Viking in- 
vaders are all kids, helmets sloping down over their eyes, 
capes dragging the ground, shields as big as they are, and 
weaponry twice as high. Giant Plechazunga images with 
white stock and red and blue cornflowers woven onto the 
wire-mesh frames, line the square. Slothrop waits hidden 
behind the Roland, a particularly humorless, goggle-eyed, 
curly-headed, pinch-waisted specimen. With Slothrop is 
an arsenal of fireworks and his assistant Fritz, who’s about 
8, and a Wilhelm Busch original. Slothrop is a little ner- 
vous, unaccustomed as he is to pigherofestivals. But Fritz 
is an old hand, and has thoughtfully brought along a 
glazed jug of some liquid brain damage flavored with dill 
and coriander and distilled, unless -Haferschleim means 
something else, from oatmeal. ia Oy baer) 

“Haferschleim, Fritz?” He takes another belt, sorry he 
asked, ; s : ‘ We Lane agi 

“Haferschleim, ja.” bey ii ee 

“Well, Haferschleim is better than none, ho, ho... .” 
Whatever it is, it seems to work swiftly on. the nerve cen- 
ters. By the time all the Vikings, to a solemn brass chorale 
from the local band, have puffed and struggled up to the 
statue, formed ranks, and demanded the town’s surrender, 


f Bais ir aH 


In the Zone 663 


_Slothrop finds his brain working with less than the usual 
keenness. At which point Fritz strikes his match, and 
all hell breaks loose, rockets, Roman candles, pinwheels 
and—PLECCCHHAZUNNGGA! an enormous charge of 
black powder blasts him out in the open, singeing his ass, 
taking the curl right out of his tail. “Oh, yes, that’s right, 
uh...” Wobbling, grinning hugely, Slothrop hollers his 
line: “I am the wrath of Donar—and this day you shall 
be my anvil!” Away they all go in a good roaring chase 
through the streets, in a shower of white blossoms, little 
kids squealing, down to the water, where everybody starts 
splashing and ducking everybody else. Townspeople break 
out beer, wine, bread, Quark, sausages. Gold-brown Kar- 
toffelpuffer are lifted dripping hot from oil smoking in 
black skillets over little peat fires. Girls commence strok- 
ing Slothrop’s snout and velvet flanks. The town is saved 
for another year. 

A peaceful, drunken day, full of music, the smell of salt 
water, marsh, flowers, frying onions, spilled beer and fresh 
fish, overhead little frost-colored clouds blowing along the 
blue sky. The breeze is cool enough to keep Slothrop from 
sweating inside this pig suit. All along the shoreline, blue- 
gray woods breathe and shimmer. White sails move out in 
the sea. . 

Slothrop returns from the brown back room of a pipe- 
smoke-and-cabbage café, and.an hour’s game of hammer- 
and-forge with—every boy’s dream—TWO healthy young 
ladies in summer dresses and woodsoled shoes to find the 
crowd begun to coagulate into clumps of three and four. 
Oh, shit. Not now, come on.... Tight aching across his 
asshole, head and stomach inflated with oat mash and 
summer beer, Slothrop sits on a pile of nets and tries, fat 
chance, to will himself alert. 

These little vortices appearing in a crowd out here 
usually mean black market. Weeds of paranoia begin to | 
bloom, army-green among the garden and midday tran- 
quillities. Last of his line, and how far-fallen—no other 
Slothrop ever felt such fear in the presence of Commerce, 
Newspapers already lie spread out on the cobbles for buy-. 
ers to dump out cans of coffee on, make sure it’s all Bohn- 
enkaffee, and not just a thin layer on top of ersatz. Gold 
watches and rings appear abruptly sunlit out of dusty 


664 Gravity's RAINBOW 


pockets. Cigarettes go flashing hand to hand among the 
limp and filthy and soundless Reichsmarks. Kids play 
underfoot while the grownups deal, in Polish, Russian, 
north-Baltic, Plattdeutsch. Some of the DP style here, a 
little impersonal, just passing through, dealing on route, 
in motion, almost as an afterthought... where'd they all 
come from, these gray hustlers, what shadows in the 
Gemiitlichkeit of the day were harboring them? 

Materializing from their own weird office silence, the 
coppers show up now, two black ’n’ white charabancs full 
of bluegreen uniforms, white armbands, little bucket hats 
with starburst insignia, truncheons already unsheathed, 
black dildos in nervous hands, wobbling, ready for action. 
The eddies in the crowd break up fast, jewelry ringing to 
the pavement, cigarettes scattered and squashed under the 
feet of stampeding civilians, among the instant litter of 
watches, war medals, silk-stuffs, rolls of bills, pinkskinned 
potatoes all their eyes staring in alarm, elbow-length kid 
gloves twisted up fingers clutching at sky, smashed light 
bulbs, Parisian slippers, gold picture-frames around still- ~ 
lifes of cobbles, rings, brooches, nobody gonna claim any 
of it, everybody scared now. 

No wonder. The cops go at busting these proceedings 
the way they must’ve handled anti-Nazi street actions 
before the War, moving in, mmm ja, with these flexible 
clubs, eyes tuned to the finest possibilities of threat, smell- 
ing of leather, of the wool-armpit rankness of their own 
fear, jumping little kids three-on-one, shaking down girls, 
old people, making them take off and shake out even 
boots and underwear, jabbing and battering in with tire- 
less truncheonwork among the crying kids and screaming 
women. Beneath the efficiency and glee is nostalgia for the 
old days. The War must’ve been lean times for crowd con- 
trol, murder and mopery was the best you could do, one 
suspect at a time. But now, with the White Market to be ~ 
protected, here again are whole streets full of bodies eager 
for that erste Abreibung, and you can bet! the heat are 
happy with it. 

Presently they have Russian reinforcements, three truck- 
loads of young Asiatics in fatigues who don’t seem to know 
where they are exactly, just shipped in from someplace ~ 
very cold and far to the east. Out of their slatsided rigs 


In the Zone 665 


like soccer players coming on field, they. form a lige ‘and 
start to clear the street by compressing the crowd toward 
the water. Slothrop is right in the middle of all this, 
shoved stumbling backward, pig mask cutting off half his 
‘vision, trying to shield whom he can—a few kids, an old 
lady who was busy earlier moving cotton yardage. The 
first billy-clubs catch him in the straw padding over his 
stomach, and don’t feel like much. Civilians are going 
down right and left, but Plechazunga’s holding his own. 
Has the morning been only a dress rehearsal?. Is Slothrop 
expected to repel real foreign invaders now? A tiny girl is 
clutching to his leg, crying the Schweinheld’s name in a 
confident voice. A grizzled old cop, years of home-front 
high living and bribes in his face, comes swinging a club at 
Slothrop’s head. The Swine-hero dodges and kicks with 
his free leg. As the cop doubles over, half a dozen yelling 
civilians jump on, relieving him of hat and truncheon. 
Tears, caught by the sun, leak out of his withered eyes. 
Then gunfire has started somewhere, panicking everybody, 
carrying Slothrop half off his feet, the kid around his leg 
torn loose and lost in the rush forever. 
Out of the street onto the quai. The police have quit 
hitting people and begun picking up loot off of the street, 
but now the Russians are moving in, and enough of them 
are looking straight at Slothrop. Providentially, one of the 
girls from the café shows up about now, takes his hand 
and tugs him along. 
“There’s a warrant out for you.” 
“A what? They’re doing pretty good without any paper- 
work.” 
“The Russians vines your uniform. They think you're a 
deserter.” 
“They're right.” . 
She takes Slothrop home with her, in his pig suit. He 
never hears her name. She is about seventeen, fair, a young 
face, easy to hurt. They lie behind a sperm-yellowed bed- 
sheet tacked to the ceiling, very close on a narrow bed 
with lacquered posts, Her mother is carving turnips in the 
_ kitchen. Their two hearts pound, his for his danger, hers 
- for Slothrop. She tells how her parents lived, her father 

a printer, married during his journeymanship, his wonder- 
years now stretched out to ten, no word where he’s been 


666 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


since ’42, when they had a note from Neukdlln, where he 
had dossed down the night with a friend. Always a friend, 
God knows how many back rooms, roundhouses, print 
shops he slept single nights in, shivering wrapped in back 
numbers of Die Welt am Montag, sure of at least shelter, 
like everybody in the Buchdrucherverband, often a meal, 
almost certainly some kind of police trouble if the stay 
lasted too long—it was a good union. They kept the Ger- 
man Wobbly traditions, they didn’t go along with Hitler 
though all the other unions were falling into line. It 
touches Slothrop’s own Puritan hopes for the Word, the 
Word made printer’s ink, dwelling along with antibodies 
and iron-bound breath in a good man’s blood, though the 
World for him be always the World on Monday, with its 
cold cutting edge, slicing away every poor illusion of 
comfort the bourgeois takes for real...did he run off 
leaflets against his country’s insanity? was he busted, 
beaten, killed? She has a snapshot of him on holiday, 
someplace Bavarian, waterfalled, white-peaked, a tanned 
and ageless face, Tyrolean hat, galluses, feet planted per- 
petually set to break into a run: the image stopped, pre- 
served here, the only way they could keep him, running 
room to room down all his cold Red suburbs, freemason’s 
night to night... their aproned and kitchen way of going 
evening or empty afternoon in to study the Ax’s and Ay’s 
of his drifter’s spirit, on the run—study how he was chang- 
ing inside the knife-fall of the shutter, what he might've 
been hearing in the water, flowing like himself, forever, 
in lost silence, behind him, already behind him. 

Even now, lying bedside a stranger in a pig disguise, 
her father is the flying element of Slothrop, of whoever 
else has lain here before, flightless, and heard the same 
promise: “I'd go anywhere with you.” He sees them walk- 
ing a railroad trestle, pines on long slanted mountains all 
around, autumn sunlight and cold, purple rainclouds, mid- 
afternoon, her face against some tall concrete structure, 
the light of the concrete coming down obli both sides 
of her cheekbones, blending into her skin, blending with 
its own light. Her motionless figure above him in a black 
greatcoat, blonde hair against the sky, himself at the top 
of a metal ladder in a trainyard, gazing up at her, all 
their shining steel roads below crisscrossing and peeling 


In the Zone 667 


off to all parts of the Zone. Both of them on the run, 'That’s 
what she wants. But Slothrop only wants to lie still with 
her heartbeat awhile... isn’t that every paranoid’s wish? 
to perfect methods of immobility? But they're coming, 
house to house, looking for their deserter, and. it’s Slothro 
who has to. go, she who has to stay. In the streets loud- 
speakers, buzzing metal throats, are proclaiming an early 
curfew tonight. Through some window of the town, lying 
in some bed, already browsing at the edges of the flelds 
of sleep, is a kid for whom the metal voice with its foreign 
accent is a sign of nightly security, to be part of the wild 
fields, the rain on the sea, dogs, smells of cooking from 
strange windows, dirt roads... part of this unrecoverable 
summer, ... 

“There's no moon,” she whispers, her eyes flinching but 
not looking away. 

“What's the best way out of town?” 

She knows a hundred. His heart, his fingertips hurt with 
shame. “I'll show you.” 

“You don’t have to.” 

“I want to,” 

Her mother gives Slothrop a couple of hard rolls to 
stash inside his pig suit. She'd find him something else to 
wear, but all her husband’s clothes have been traded for 
food at the Tauschzentrale. His last picture of her is 
framed in the light of her kitchen, through the window, a 
fading golden woman, head in a nod over a stove with a 
single pot simmering, flowered wallpaper deep-orange and 
red behind her averted face. 

The daughter leads him over low stone walls, along 
drainage ditches and into culverts, southwesterly to the 
outskirts of the town. Far behind them the clock in the 
Peterskirche strikes nine, the sightless Roland below con- 
tinuing to gaze across the square. White flowers fall one 
by one from the images of Plechazunga, Stacks of a power 
station rise, ghostly, smokeless, painted on the sky. A wind- 
mill creaks out in the scusharvele, 

The city gate is high and skinny, with stairsteps to 
- nowhere on top. The road away goes curving through the 
ogival opening, out into the night meadows. 

“I want to go with you.” But she makes no move to 

step through the arch with him. 
\ i 


668 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


“Maybe Ill be back.” It’s no drifter’s lie, both of them 
are sure that someone will be, next year at about: this 
time, maybe next year’s Schweinheld, someone close 
enough...and if the name, the dossier are not exactly 
the same, well, who believes in those? She’s a printer’s 
skid, she knows the medium, she even learned from him 
how to handle a Winkelhaken pretty good, how to set’ up 
a line and take it down, “You're a May bug,” she whispers, 
and kisses him good-by, and stands watching him go, a 
sniffing still girl in pinafore and army boots by the iso- 
lated gate. “Good night. . . .” 

Docile girl, good night. What does he have for her 
but a last snapshot of a trudging pig in motley, merging 
with the stars and woodpiles, something to put beside 
that childhood still of her father? He impersonates flight 
though his heart isn’t in it and yet he’s lost all knowledge 
of staying....Good night, it’s curfew, get back inside, 
back in your room .. . good night... . 

He keeps to open country, sleeping when he’s too tired 
to walk, straw and velvet insulating him from the cold, 
One morning he wakes in a hollow between a stand of 
beech and a stream. It is sunrise and bitter cold, and 
there seems to be a warm tongue licking roughly at his 
face. He is looking here into the snout of another pig, 
very fat and pink pig. She grunts and smiles amiably, 
blinking long eyelashes. 

“Wait. How about thisP” He puts on the pig mask. She 
stares for a minute, then moves up to Slothrop and kisses 
him, snout-to-snout. Both of them are dripping with dew. 
He follows her on down to the stream, takes off the mask 
again and throws water at his face while she drinks beside 
him, slurping, placid. The water is clear, running lively, 
cold. Round rocks knock together under the stream, A 
resonant sound, a music. It would be worth something to 
sit day and night, in and out, listening to these sounds of 
water and cobbles unfold. ... | 

Slothrop is hungry. “Come on. We got |to find break- 
fast.” Beside a small pond near a farmhouse, the pig 
discovers a wood stake driven into the ground. She begins 
snuffing around it. Slothrop kicks aside loose earth and 
finds a brick cairn, stuffed with potatoes ensiled last year. 
“Fine for you,” as she falls to eagerly, “but I can’t eat that 


In the Zone 669 


stuff.” Sky is shining in the calm surface of the water. 
Nobody seems to be around. Slothrop wanders off to check 

._ the farmhouse. Tall white daisies grow all over the yard. 
‘ Thatch-hooded windows upstairs are dark, no smoke comes 
from the chimneys. But the chicken-house in back is occu- 
pied. He eases a big fat white hen up off of her nest, 
reaches gingerly for the.eggs—PKAWW she flies into a 
dither, tries to peck Slothrop’s arm off, friends come shoot- 
ing in from outside raising a godawful commotion, at 
which point the hen has worked her wings through the 
wood slats so she can’t get back in and is too fat below 
the wingpits to get the rest of the way out. So, there she © 
hangs, flapping and screaming, while Slothrop grabs three 
eggs then tries to push her wings back inside for her. It 
is.a frustrating job, especially trying to keep the eggs 
balanced. The rooster is in the doorway hollering Achtung, 
Achtung, discipline in his harem is shot to hell, noisy 
white tumbleweed hens are barrelassing all over the inside 
of the coop, and blood is flowing from Slothrop in half a 
dozen places. 

Then he hears. a dog barking—time to give up on this 
hen—comes outside sees a lady in her Wehrmacht auxiliary 
outfit 30 meters away leveling a shotgun and the dog 
charging in growling, teeth bared, eyes on Slothrop’s 
throat. Slothrop goes scrambling around the henhouse just 
as the gun kicks off a good-morning blast. About then the 
pig shows up and chases off the dog. Away they go, eggs 
cradled in pig mask, lady yelling, hens raising hell, pig 
galloping along beside. There’s a final shotgun blast, but 
by then they’re out of range. 

About a mile farther on they pause, for Slothrop’s 
breakfast. “Good show,” thumping the pig affectionately, 
She crouches, catching her breath, gazing at him while 
he eats raw eggs and smokes half a cigarette. Then they 
set off again. 

Soon they have begun to angle toward the sea. The pig 
seems to know where she’s going. Far away on another 
road, a great cloud of dust hangs, crawling southward, 
maybe a Russian horse convoy. Fledgling storks are try- 
ing out their wings over the haystacks and fields. Tops of 
solitary trees are blurred green, as if smudged accidentally 

by a sleeve. Brown windmills turn at the horizon, across 
miles of straw-sprinkled red earth. 


Bi 


670 Gravity's RaInBow 


A pig is a jolly companion, 
Boar, sow, barrow, or gilt—. 
A pig is a pal, who'll boost your morale, 
Though mountains may topple and tilt. 
When they’ve blackballed, bamboozled, pe burned you, 
When they’ve turned on you, Tory and 
. Though you may be thrown over by Tabby r= Rover, 
You'll never go wrong with a pig, a pig, 
You'll never go wrong with a pig! © 


By nightfall they have entered a wooded stretch. Fog 
drifts in the hollows. A lost unmilked cow complains some- 
where in the darkness. The pig and Slothrop settled down 
to sleep among pines thick with shreds of tinfoil, a cloud 
of British window dumped to fox the German radars in 
some long-ago raid, a whole forest of Christmas trees, 
tinsel rippling in the wind, catching the starlight, silent, 
ice-cold crownfire acres wild over their heads all night. 
Slothrop keeps waking to find the pig snuggled in a bed 
of pine needles, watching over him. It’s not for danger, 
or out of restlessness. Maybe she’s decided Slothrop needs 
. looking after. In the tinfoil light she’s very sleek and con- 
vex, her bristles look smooth as down. Lustful thoughts 
come filtering into Slothrop’s mind, little peculiarity here 
you know, hehheh, nothing he ean't-handle. ... They fall 
asleep under the decorated trees, the pig a wandering 
eastern magus, Slothrop in his costume a gaudy present 
waiting for morning and a child to claim him. 

Next day, about noon, they enter a slow-withering city, 
alone on the Baltic coast, and perishing from an absence 
of children. The sign over the city gate, in burned bulbs 
and empty sockets, reads zw6LFKINDER. The great wheel, 
dominating the skyline for miles out of town, leans a little 
askew, grim old governess, sun catching long streaks of 
rust, sky pale through the iron lattice that droops its long 
twisted shadow across the sand and into ie33 plum sea. 
Wind cat-howls in and out the doorless halls and houses. 

“Frieda.” A voice calling from the blue shadow behind 
a wall. Grunting, smiling, the pig stands | her ground— 
look who I brought home. Soon a thin ‘freckled. man, 
blond, nearly bald, steps out into the sun. Glancing at 
Slothrop, nervous, he reaches to scratch Frieda between 
the ears. “I am Pékler. Thank Lowe for Pees her bake: 


t 


In the Zone 671 


“No, no—she brought me.” 

“Ves,” * 
Pokler is living in the basement of the town hall. He 

has some coffee heating on a driftwood fire in the stove. 

“Do you play chess?” 

Frieda kibitzes. Slothrop, who tends to play more by 
superstition than strategy, is obsessed with protecting his 
knights, Springer and Springer—willing to lose anything 
else, thinking no more than a move or two ahead if that, 
he alternates long lethargic backing and filling with bursts 
of idiot razzle-dazzle that have Pokler frowning, but not 
with worry. About the time Slothrop loses his queen, 
“Sa-a-a-y, waitaminute, did you say Pékler?” 

Zip the man is out with a Luger as big as a house— 
really fast guy—with the muzzle pointing right at Slo- 
throp’s head. For a moment Slothrop, in his pig suit, 
thinks that Pékler thinks that he, Slothrop, has been fool- 
ing around with Frieda the Pig, and that there is about 
to be a shotgun, or Luger, wedding here—in fact the 
phrase unto thee I pledge my trough has just arrived in 
his brain when he realizes that what Pékler’s actually 
saying is, “You'd better leave. Only two more moves and 
Id’ve had you anyway.” 

“Lemme at least tell you my story,” blithering fast as 
he can the Ziirich information with Pékler’s name on it, 
the Russian-American-Herero search for the S-Gerit, won- 
dering meantime, in parallel sort of, if that Oberst Enzian 
wasn’t right about going native in the Zone—beginning to 
get ideas, fixed and slightly, ah, erotic notions about 
Destiny are you Slothrop? eh? tracing back the route 
Frieda the pig brought him along, trying to remember 
forks where they might have turned another way. ... 

“The Schwarzgerit.” Pékler shakes his head. “I don’t 
know what it was. I was never that interested. Is that 
really all you're after?” 

Slothrop thinks that over. Their coffee cups take sun- 
light from the window ‘and bounce it back up to the ceil- 
ing, bobbing ellipses of blue light. “Don’t know. Except 
for this kind of personal tie-in with Imipolex G....” 

- “Jt’s an aromatic polyimide,” Pékler putting the gun 
back in his shirt. 

“Tell me about it,” sez Slothrop. 


_ . ee ' 


672 Gravity’s RaiInsow 


Well, but not before he has told something of his Ise 
and her summer returns, enough for Slothrop to be taken 
again by the nape and pushed against Bianca’s dead flesh. 
... Ilse, fathered on Greta Erdmann’s silver and passive 
image, Bianca, conceived during the filming of the very 
scene that was in his thoughts as Pékler pumped in the 
gore: Seger of sperm—how could they not be the same 
c 

She’s still with you, though harder to see these days, 
nearly invisible as a glass of gray lemonade in a twilit 
room... still she is there, cool and acid and sweet, wait- 
ing to be swallowed down to touch your deepest cells, to 
work among your saddest dreams. 


O 


Pokler does manage to tell a little about Laszlo Jamf, 
but keeps getting sidetracked off into talking about the 
movies, German movies Slothrop has never heard of, 
much less seen... yes here’s some kind of fanatical movie 
hound all right— “On D-Day,” he confesses, “when I 
heard General Eisenhower on the radio announcing the in- 
vasion of Normandy, I thought it was really Clark Gable, 
have you ever noticed? the voices are identical... .” 

In the last third of his life, there came over Laszlo 
Jamf—so it seemed to those who from out in the wood 
lecture halls watched his eyelids slowly granulate, spots 
and wrinkles grow across his image, disintegrating it 
toward old age—a hostility, a strangely personal hatred, 
for the covalent bond. A conviction that, for synthetics to 
have a future at all, the bond must be improved on— 
some students even read “transcended.” That something 
so mutable, so soft, as a sharing of electrons by atoms of 
carbon should lie at the core of life, his life, struck Jamf 
as a cosmic humiliation. Sharing? How ‘much stronger, 
how everlasting was the ionic bond: e electrons are 
not shared, but captured. Seized! and held! polarized plus 
and minus, these atoms, no ambiguities... how he came 
to love that clarity: how stable it was, such mineral stub- 
bornness! . eae a 

“Whatever lip-service we may pay to Reason,” he told 


In the Zone 673 


Pékler’s class back at the T.H., “to moderation and com- 
promise, nevertheless there remains the lion. A lion in 
each one of you. He is either tamed—by too much mathe- 
matics, by details of design, by corporate procedures—or 
he stays wild, an eternal predator. 

“The lion does not know subtleties and half-solutions. 
He does not accept sharing as a basis for anything! He 
takes, he holds! He is not a Bolshevik or a Jew. You will 
never hear relativity from the lion. He wants the absolute. 
Life and death. Win and lose. Not truces or arrangements, 
but the joy of the leap, the roar, the blood.” 

If this be National Socialist chemistry, blame that some- 
thing-in-the-air, the Zeitgeist. Sure, blame it, Prof.-Dr. 
Jamf was not immune. Neither was his student Poékler. 
But through Inflation and Depression, Pékler’s idea of “the 
lion” came to have a human face attached to it, a movie 
face natiirlich, that of the actor Rudolf Klein-Rogge, 
whom Pékler idolized, and wanted to be like. 

Klein-Rogge was carrying nubile actresses off to rooftops 
when King Kong was still on the tit with no motor skills 
to speak of. Well, one nubile actress anyway, Brigitte 
Helm in Metropolis. Great movie. Exactly the world Pék- 
ler and evidently quite a few others were dreaming about 
those days, a Corporate City-state where technology was 
the source of power, the engineer worked closely with the 
administrator, the masses labored unseen far underground, 
and ultimate power lay with a single leader at the top, 
fatherly and benevolent and just, who wore magnificent- 
looking suits and whose name Pokler couldn’t remember, 

being too taken with Klein-Rogge playing the mad in- 
ventor that Pékler and his codisciples under Jamf longed 
to be—indispensable to those who ran the Metropolis, yet, 
at the end, the untamable lion who could let it all. crash, 
girl, State, masses, himself, asserting his reality against 
them all in one last roaring plunge from rooftop to 
Street... . ‘ 
_ A curious potency. Whatever it was the real visionaries 

were picking up out of the hard tessitura of those days 
and city streets, whatever Kathe Kollwitz saw that brought 
her lean Death down to hump Its women from behind, 
and they to love it so, seemed now and then to have 
touched Pékler too, in his deeper excursions into the Mare 


674 Graviry’s RaInsow 


Nocturnum. He found delight not unlike a razor sweeping 
his skin and nerves, scalp to soles, in ritual submissions to 
the Master of this night space and of himself, the male 
embodiment of a technologique that embraced power not 
for its social uses but for just those chances of surrender, 
personal and dark surrender, to the Void, to delicious and 
screaming collapse....To Attila the Hun, as a matter of 
fact, come west out of the steppes to smash the precious 
structure of magic and incest that held together the king- 
dom of the Burgundians. Pékler was tired that night, all 
day out scavenging for coal. He kept falling asleep, wak- 
ing to images that for a half a minute he could make no 
sense of at all—a close-up of a face? a forest? the scales 
of the Dragon? a battle-scene? Often enough, it would 
resolve into Rudolf Klein-Rogge, ancient Oriental thana- 
tomaniac Attila, head shaved except for a topknot, bead- 
strung, raving with grandiloquent gestures and those 
enormous bleak eyes. .. . Pékler would nod back into sleep 
with bursts of destroying beauty there for his dreams to 
work on, speaking barbaric gutturals for the silent mouths, 
smoothing the Burgundians into something of the meek- 
ness, the grayness of certain crowds in the beerhalls back 
at the T.H.. .and wake again—it went on for hours— 
into some further progression of carnage, of fire and 
smashing. . 

On the ay home, by tram and foot, his wife bitched 
at Pékler for dozing off, ridiculed his engineer’s devotion 
to cause-and-effect. How could he tell her that the dra- 
matic connections were really all there, * his dreams? 
How could he tell her anything? 

Klein-Rogge is remembered most of all hr his role as 
Dr. Mabuse. You were meant to think of Hugo Stinnes, 
the tireless operator behind the scenes of apparent Infla- 
tion, apparent history: gambler, financial wizard, arch- 
gangster...a fussy biirgerlich mouth, jowls, graceless 
moves, a first impression of comic technocracy . . . and yet, 
when the rages came over him, breaking through from 
beneath the rationalized look, with his glacial eyes become 
windows into the bare savanna, then the real Mabuse sur- 
faced, vital and proud against the gray forces surround- 
ing him, edging him toward the doom he must’ve known 
he couldn’t escape, the silent inferno of guns, grenades, 


In the Zone 675 


streets full of troops attacking his headquarters, and his 
own madness at the end of the secret tunnel... . And who 
brought him down but matinee idol Bernhardt Goetzke as 
State Prosecutor von Wenk, Goetzke who played tender, 
wistful bureaucratic Death in Der Miide Tod, here too 
running true to form, too tame, too gentle for the jaded 
Countess he coveted—but Klein-Rogge jumped in, with all 
claws out, drove her effeminate husband to suicide, seized 
her, threw her on his bed, the languid bitch—took her! 
while gentle Goetzke sat in his office, among his papers 
and sybarites—Mabuse trying to hypnotize him, drug him, 
bomb him to death in his own office—nothing worked, 
each time the great Weimar inertia, files, hierarchies, rou- 
tines, kept saving him. Mabuse was the savage throwback, 
the charismatic flash no Sunday-afternoon Agfa plate could 
ever bear, the print through the rippling solution each 
time flaring up to the same annihilating white (Piscean 
depths Pékler has cruised dream and waking, beneath him 
images of everyday Inflation dreariness, queues, stock- 
brokers, boiled potatoes in a dish, searching with only 
gills and gut—some nervous drive toward myth he doesn’t | 
even know if he believes in—for the white light, ruins of 
Atlantis, intimations of a truer kingdom).... 

Metropolitan inventor Rothwang, King Attila, Mabuse 
der Spieler, Prof.-Dr.’ Laszlo Jamf, all their yearnings 
aimed the same way, toward a form of death that could 
be demonstrated to hold joy and defiance, nothing of 
bourgeois Goetzkian death, of self-deluding, mature ac- 
‘ceptance, relatives in the parlor, knowing faces the chil- 
dren can always read.... 

“You have the two choices,” Jamf cried, his last lecture 
of the year: outside were the flowery strokings of wind, 
girls in pale-colored dresses, oceans of beer, male choruses 
intensely, movingly lifted as they sang Semper sit in flores/ 
Semper sit in flo-ho-res ... “stay behind with carbon and 
hydrogen, take your lunch-bucket in to the works every 
morning with the faceless droves who can’t wait to get 

in out of the sunlight or move beyond. Silicon, boron, 
_phosphorus—these can replace carbon, and can bond to 
-mitrogen ‘instead of hydrogen—” a few snickers here, not 
unanticipated by the playful old pedagogue, be he always 
sin flower: his involvement in getting Weimar to subsidize 


me 
Phe 
oS 


676 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


the IG’s Stickstoff Syndikat was well known—“move be- 
yond life, toward the inorganic. Here is no frailty, no 
mortality—here is Strength, and the Timeless.” Then his 
well-known finale, as he wiped away the scrawled C—H 
on his chalkboard and wrote, in enormous letters, Si—N. 

The wave of the future. But Jamf himself, oddly, did 
not move on. He never synthesized those new inorganic 
rings or chains he had prophesied so dramatically. Had 
he only remained behind in the trough, academic genera- 
tions swelling away just ahead, or had he known some- 
thing Pokler and the others didn’t? Were his exhortations 
in the lecture hall some kind of eccentric joke? He stayed 
with C—H, and took his lunchbucket to America. Pokler 
lost touch with him after the Technische Hochschule— 
so did all his old pupils. He was now under the ‘sinister 
influence of Lyle Bland, and if he was still seeking to 
escape the mortality of the covalent bond, Jamf was doing 
it in the least obvious way there was. 


Oo : 


If that Lyle Bland hadn’t joined the Masons, he'd still 
probably be up to those nefarious tricks of his. Just as 
there are, in the World, machineries committed to injustice 
as an enterprise, so too there seem to be provisions active 
for balancing things out once in a while. Not as an enter- 
prise, exactly, but at least in the dance of things. The 
Masons, in the dance of things, turned out to be one of 
these where Bland was concerned. 

Imagine the fellow’s plight—got so’ much money he 
don’t know what to do with it all. Don’t go screaming, 
“Give it to me!” either. He’s given it to you, though in 
roundabout ways you might need a good system of search 
to unsnarl. Oh, has he given it to you. By way of the 
Bland Institute and the Bland Foundation, the man has 
had his meathooks well into the American day-to-day since 
1919. Who do you think sat on top of the! patent for that — 
100-miles-per-gallon carburetor, eh? sure you've heard that — 
story—maybe even snickered along with paid anthropolo- 
gists who called it Automotive Age Myth or some shit— 
well, turns out the item was real, all right, and it was Lyle — 


In the Zone — 677 


Bland who sprang for those academic hookers doing the 
snickering and the credentialed lying. Or how about the 
great Killer Weed advertising campaign of the thirties, 
who do you think worked hand-in-glove (or, as grosser 
individuals have put it, penis-in-mouth) with the FBI on 
that one? And remember all those guy-goes-to-the-doctor- 
can't-get-a-hardon jokes? Planted by Bland, yup—half a 
dozen basic variations, after having done depth studies for 
the National Research Council that indicated an unac- 
ceptable 36% of the male work force wasn’t paying enough 
attention to their cocks—not enough genital obsession 
there, and it was undermining the efficiency of the organs 
doing the real work. 

Psychological studies became, in fact, a Bland specialty. 
His probe into the subconscious of early-Depression Amer- 
ica is considered a classic, and widely credited with 
improving the plausibility of Roosevelt’s “election” in 
1932. Though many of his colleagues found a posture of 
hatred for FDR useful, Bland was too delighted to go 
through the motions. For him, FDR was exactly the man: 
Harvard, beholden to all kinds of money old and. new, 
commodity and retail, Harriman and Weinberg: an Ameri- 
can synthesis which had never occurred before, and which 
opened the way to certain grand possibilities—all grouped 
under the term “control,” which seemed to be a private 
code-word—more in line with the aspirations of Bland and 
others. A year later Bland joined the Business Advisory 
Council set up under Swope of General Electric, whose 
ideas on matters of “control” ran close to those of Wal- 
ter Rathenau, of German GE. Whatever Swope’s outfit 
did, it did in secret. Nobody got to see its files. Bland 
wasn’t about to tell anybody, either. 

He had gotten to be buddies, after World War I, with 
the office of the Alien Property Custodian. Their job was 
to dispose of confiscated German interests in the U.S. A 
lot of Midwestern money was involved here, which is 
what got Bland embroiled in the Great Pinball Difficulty, 
and so into the Masons. Seems that through something 
called the Chemical Foundation—cover names in those 
days had no style to them—the APC had sold Bland a few 
of Laszlo Jamf’s early patents, along with the U.S. agency 
of Glitherius Paint & Dye, a Berlin firm. A few years later, 


St. 


678 Gravity’s RAInsow 


in 1925, in the course of being put together, the IG 
bought back 50% of American Glitherius from Bland, who 
was using his end of it as a patent-holding company. 
Bland got cash, securities, and controlling interest in a 
Glitherius subsidiary in Berlin being run by a Jew named 
Pflaumbaum, yesyes, the same Pflaumbaum Frank Pékler 
worked for till the placed bummed down and Pokler went 
back out on the streets. (Indeed, there were those who 
could see Bland’s hand in that disaster, though the Jew 
got blamed, fucked under by the courts, attached till he 
was bankrupt, and, in the fullness of time, sent east along 
with many others of his race. We would also have to 
show some interlock between Bland and the Ufa movie- 
distribution people who sent Pékler out with his advertis- 
ing bills to Reinickendorf that night, to his fateful meeting 
with Kurt Mondaugen and the Verein fiir Raumschiffahrt 
—not to mention separate connections for Achtfaden, Nar- 
risch, and the other S-Gerit people—before we'd have a 
paranoid structure worthy of the name. Alas, the state of 
the art by 1945 was nowhere near adequate to that kind 
of data retrieval. Even if it had been, Bland, or his suc- 
cessors and assigns, could’ve bought programmers by the 
truckload to come in and make sure all the information 
fed out was harmless. Those like Slothrop, with the great- 
est interest in discovering the truth, were thrown back on 
dreams, psychic flashes, omens, eryptographies, drug- 
epistemologies, all dancing on a ground of terror, contra- 
diction, absurdity.) 

After the Plaumbaum fire, lines of power among Bland 
» and his German colleagues had to be renegotiated. It 
dragged on for a few years. Bland found himself in De- 
pression in St. Louis, talking with one Alfonso Tracy, 
Princeton ’06, St. Louis Country Club, moving into petro- 
chemicals in a big way, Mrs. Tracy dithering in and out 
of the house with yardage and armloads of flowers, pre- — 
paring for the annual Veiled Prophet Ball, Tracy himself 
preoccupied with the appearance of some individuals down 
from Chicago in flashy pinstripe suits, two-tone shoes and 
snap-brim fedoras, all talking in accents staccato as a 
Thompson. pg 

“Oh, do I need a good electronics man,” Tracy moaned. . i 
“What do you do with these wops? The whole i 


A In the Zone 679 
was bad, and now they won't take it back. If I step out 
of line, they'll murder me. They'll rape Mabel, they'll go 
back to Princeton some dark night a-and castrate my kid! 
You know what I think it is, Lyle? A plot!” 

' Vendettas, jeweled gauntlets, subtle poisons come in- 
filtrating this well-mannered parlor with the picture of 
Herbert Hoover on the piano, the pinks in the Nieman- 
Marcus bowl, the Bauhaus-style furniture like alabaster 
slabs of a model city (you expect little HO trains to come 
whirring out from under the davenport, cans ’n’ reefers 
on and on across the carpet’s ash-colored lowland...). 
Alfonso Tracy’s long face, creased either side of the nose 
and on around the mustache line, dragged down by wor- 
ries, thirty years without a genuine smile (“Even Laurel 
& Hardy doesn’t work for me any more!”), morose with 
fright in his easy chair. How could Lyle Bland not be 
touched? 

“Got just the fella,” sez he, touching Tracy’s arm, com- 
passionate. Always good to have an engineer on tap. This 
one did some just top-notch electronic-surveillance designs 
once for the then-fledgling FBI, on a contract the Bland 
Institute landed a few years ago and subbed part of 
out to Siemens over there in Germany. “Have him in 
tomorrow on the Silver Streak. No problem, Al.” 

“Come on out and have a look,” sighs Tracy. They hop 
in the Packard and drive out to the green little river 
town of Mouthorgan, Missouri, which is a railroad station, 
a tanning factory, a few frame houses, and dominating 
the area a gigantic Masonic hall, not a window on the 
whole massive monolith, 

After a lot of rigmarole at the door, Bland is finally 
allowed in and led through velvet poolrooms, elaborate 
polished-wood gambling setups, chrome bars, soft bed- 
rooms, on to a large warehouse section in back, which is 
crammed ten high with more pinball machines than 
Bland’s ever seen in one place in his life, Oh Boys, Grand 
3lams, World Serieses, Lucky Lindies as far as the eye 
2an reach. 

“And every one is fucked up,” sez melancholy Tracy. 
‘Look at this.” It’s a Folies-Bergéres: four-color lovelies 
loing the cancan all over it, zeros happening to coincide 
with eyes, nipples, and cunts, one of your racy-type games 


: 
7 


680 Gravity’s RaInsow 


here, a little hostile toward the ladies but all in fun! “You 
got a nickel?” Chungg, boing there goes the ball just 
missing a high-scoring hole, hmm looks like a permanent 
warp there ahnnnggghk knocks a flasher worth 1000 but 
only 50 lights up on the board—“You see?” Tracy screams 
.as the ball heads like a rock for the bottom, outside 
chance to get with a flipper zong flipper flips the other 
fucking way, and the board lights up Tix7. 

“Tilt?” Bland scratching his head. “You didn’t even—” 

“They're all like that,” Tracy watering with frustration. 
“You try it.” 

The second ball isn’t even out of the chute before Bland 
gets another TILT, again without having applied any En- 
glish. Third ball gets stuck somehow against a solenoid and 
(helphelp, it’s hollering, wounded high little voice, oh 'm 
being electrocuted...) dingdingding, gongs and racing 
numbers up on the board, 400,000, 675,000 bong a mil- 
lion! greatest Folies-Bergéres score in history and climbing, 
the poor spherical soul against the solenoid thrashing, 
clonic, horrible (yes they’re sentient all right, beings from 
the planetoid Katspiel, of veryvery elliptical orbit—which 
is to say it passed by Earth only once, a long time ago, 
nearly back at the grainy crepuscular Edge, and nobody 
knows where Katspiel is now or when, or if, itl be back. 
It’s that familiar division between return and. one-shot 
visitation. If Katspiel had enough energy to leave the 
sun’s field forever, then it has left these kind round beings 
in eternal exile, with no chance of ever being gathered 
back home, doomed to masquerade as ball bearings, as 
steelies in a thousand marble games—to know the great 
thumbs of Keokuk and Puyallup, Oyster Bay, Inglewood 
—Danny D’Allesandro and Elmer Ferguson, Peewee Bren- 
nan and Flash Womack... where are they now? where 
do you think? they all. got drafted, some are dead on 
Iwo, some gangrenous in the snow im the forest of 
Arden, and their. thumbs, first rifle inspection in Basic, 
GI’d, driven deep back into childhood | as little finger 
sweat-cams off M-1 operating handle, thumb pushing down 
follower still deep in breech, bolt sshhOCK! whacks thumb 
oh shit yes it hurts and good-by to another unbeatable and 
legendary thumb, gone for good back to the summer dust, 
bags of chuckling glass, bigfooted basset hounds, smell of 


pe a ah ‘ae 


ae 


- In the Zone 681 


steel playground slides heating in the sun), well here 
come these cancan girls now, Folies-Bergéres maenads, 
moving in for the kill, big lipstick smiles around blazing 
choppers, some Offenbach galop come jigging in now out 
of the loudspeakers that are implicit in this machine’s 
design, long gartered legs kicking out over the agony of 
this sad spherical permanent AWOL, all his companions 
in the chute vibrating their concern and love, feeling his 
pain but helpless, inert without the spring, the hustler’s 
hand, the drunk’s masculinity problems, the vacuum hours 
of a gray cap and an empty lunchbox, needing these to 
run their own patterns down the towering coils, the deep 
holes with their promises of rest that only kick you 
wobbling out again, always at the mercy of gravity, find- 
ing now and then the infinitesimally shallow grooves of 
other runs, great runs (twelve heroic minutes in Virginia 
Beach, Fourth of July, 1927, a drunken sailor whose ship 
went down at Leyte Gulf... flipped up off the board, 
your first three-dimensional trip is always your best, when 
you came down again it wasn’t the same, and every time 
you'd pass anywhere near the micro-dimple you made 
when you fell, you'd get a rush... sobered, a few, having 
looked into the heart of the solenoid, seen the magnetic 
serpent and energy in its nakedness, long enough to be 
changed, to bring back from the writhing lines of force 
down in that pit an intimacy with power, with glazed 
badlands of soul, that set them apart forever—check out 
the portrait of Michael Faraday in the Tate Gallery in 
London, Tantivy Mucker-Maffick did once, to fill up a 
womanless and dreary afternoon, and wondered then how 
eyes of men could grow so lambent, sinister, so educated 
among the halls of dread and the invisible...) but now 
the voices of the murder-witness coquettes grow shrill, 
with more of a blade’s edge, the music changes key, 
tching higher and higher, the ruffled buttocks bumping 
kward more violently, the skirts flipping redder and 
Jeeper each time, covering more of the field, eddying to 
blood, to furnace finale, and how’s the Katspiel Kid gonna 
yet out of this one? 
Well, wouldn’t you know it, just as things look worst, 
Providence plants a short—statatatah! the lights go out 
leaving a diminishing red glow on the shaven cheeks and 


ae 


682 Gravity’s RaiInsow 


chins of the two operators cringing before the girls’ de- 
stroying kooch-dance, the solenoid jitters to silence, the 
chrome ball, released, rolls traumatized back to the com- 
fort of its friends. 

“They’ re all like this?” 

“Oh, was I took,” groans Alfonso Tracy. 

“It comes and goes,” consoles Bland, and here we get a 
reprise of Gerhardt von Géll’s “Bright Days for the Black 
Market,” with allowances made for time, place and color: 


There'll al-ways—be another dollar, 

Any way it hap-pens! 

If they catch ya nap-pin’, 

Wake up-with, the dew on the grass 

*n’ you can hand ’em their ass— 

You can make another dollar, 

Third eye up on that py-ra-mid, 

Oh give a listen kid, 

It’s just winkin’ at you, singin’, “Piss on through!” 


There’s a will, there’ Ss a way, 

Doesn’t happen, evry day, 

But if ya got-the-brains, those Tid matt cing 
ll never whistle your dreams away, hey— 


Just flip another dollar, 

Heads or tails it'll be all right, 

You can lose the fight, but 

That ever-lovin’ War goes on and on, ya know, 
Just follow that dollar and vo-dee, o-do-dol 


All the baggy-pants outfielders, doughboys in khaki, 
cancan girls now sedate, bathing beauties even more so, 
cowboys and cigar-store Indians, google-eyed Negroes, 
apple-cart urchins, lounge lizards and movie queens, card- 
sharps, clowns, crosseyed lamppost drunks, flying aces, 
motorboat captains, white hunters on safari and Negroid 
apes, fat men, chefs in chefs’ hats, Jewish usurers, XXX 
jug-clutching hillbillies, comic-book cats dogs and mice, 
prizefighters and mountaineers, radio stars, midgets, ten-in- 
one freaks, railroad hobos, marathon dascars, swing bands, 
high-society partygoers, racehorses and jockeys, taxidanc-. 
ers, Indianapolis drivers, sailors ashore and wahines in 
hula skirts, .sinewed Olympic runners, tycoons holding big 


In the Zone 683 


round bags with dollar signs, all join in on a second grand 
chorus of the song, all the boards of the pinball machines 
flashing on and off, primary colors with a touch of acid to 
them, flippers flipping, bells ringing, nickels pouring out 
of the coinboxes of the more enthusiastic, each sound 
and move exactly in its place in the complex ensemble. 

Outside the temple, the organization reps from Chicago 
lurk, play morra, drink Canadian blends out of silver hip- 
flasks, oil and clean .38s and generally carry on in their 
loathsome ethnic way, Popish inscrutability in every sharp 
crease and shadowy jowl. No way to tell if someplace in 
the wood file cabinets exists a set of real blueprints telling 
exactly how all these pinball machines were rewired—a 
randomness deliberately simulated—of if it has happened 
at real random, preserving at least our faith in Malfunc- 
tion as still something beyond Their grasp...a faith that 
each machine, individually, has simply, in innocence, gone 
on the blink, after the thousands of roadhouse nights, 
end-of-the-world Wyoming thunderstorms that come 
straight down on your hatless head, truckstop ampheta- 
mines, tobacco smoke clawing at insides of eyelids, homi- 
cidal grabs after some way out of the year’s never-slack- 
ening shit...have players forever strangers brought 
about, separately, alone, each of these bum machines? 
believe it: they've sweated, kicked, cried, smashed, lost 
their balance forever—a single Mobility you never heard, 
a unity unaware of itself, a silence the encyclopedia his- — 
tories have blandly filled up with agencies, initials, spokes- 
men and deficits enough to keep us from finding them 
again... but for the moment, through the elaborate the- 
atrical foofooraw of Mob ’n’ Masons, it has concentrated 
here, in the back of the Mouthorgan temple, an elegant 
chaos to bend the ingenuity of Bland’s bought expert, 
Silver-Streaking Bert Fibel. 

Last we saw of Fibel he was hooking, stretching, and 
running shock cord for that Horst Achtfaden back in his 
gliding days, Fibel who stayed on the ground, and saw his 
friend on to Peenemiinde—saw him on? isn’t that a slice 
of surplus paranoia there, not quite justified is it—well, 
call it Toward a Case for Bland’s Involvement with Acht- 
faden Too, if you want. Fibel worked for Siemens back 
_ when it was still part of the Stinnes trust. Along with his 


684 Gravity's Rainsow 


design work he also put in some time as a Stinnes intelli- 
gence agent. There are also still loyalties to Vereinigte 
Stahlwerke in effect, though Fibel happens to be working 
now at the General Electric plant in Pittsfield, Massachu- 
setts. It’s in Bland’s interest to have an agent in the Berk- 
shires, can you guess why? Yup! to keep an eye on 
adolescent Tyrone Slothrop, is why. Nearly ten years after 
the original deal was closed, IG Farben is still finding it 
easier to subcontract the surveillance of young Tyrone 
back to Lyle Bland. 

This stonefaced kraut Fibel is a genius with solenoids 
and switches. How all this machinery got “out of the 
glue,” as they say over there, is a sinful waste of time 
even to think about—he dives into topologies and color- 
codes, the odor of rosin flux goes seeping into the pool- 
rooms and saloons, a Schnipsel here and there, a muttered 
also or two, and before you know it he’s got most of 
them working again. You can bet there’s a lotta happy 
Masons in Mouthorgan, Missouri. 

In return for his good deed, Lyle Bland, who couldn’t 
care less, is made a Mason. He finds good fellowship, all 
kinds of comfort designed to remind him of his virility, 
and even a number of useful business contacts. Beyond 
this, all is just as tight as that Business Advisory Council. 
Non-Masons stay pretty much in the dark about What 
Goes On, though now and then something jumps out, 
exposes itself, jumps giggling back again, leaving you with 
few details but a lot of Awful Suspicions. Some of the 
American Founding Fathers were Masons, for instance: 
There is a theory going around that the U.S.A. was and 
still is a gigantic Masonic plot under the ultimate control 
of the group known as the Illuminati. It is difficult to look 
for long at the strange single eye crowning the pyramid 
which is found on every dollar bill ‘and not begin to 
believe the story, a little. Too many anarchists in 19th- 


centuty Europe—Bakunin, Proudhon, Salverio Friscia— — 


were Masons for it to be pure chance. Lovers of global 
conspiracy, not all. of them Catholic, can count on the 
Masons for a few good shivers and voids when all else 


fails. One of the best of the classic Weird Mason Stories — 
has Doctor Livingstone (living stoneP oh, yes) come wan- — 
dering into a‘native village in, not even the heart, but the 2 


io yen 
gw hl 


In the Zone 685 


subconscious of Darkest Africa, a place, a tribe he’s never 
seen before: fires in the silence, unfathomable stares, 
Livingstone ambles up to the village chief and flashes him 
a Masonic high sign—the chief recognizes it, returns it, 
all smiles, and orders every fraternal hospitality laid on 
for the white stranger. But recall that Dr. Livingstone, 
like Wernher von Braun, was born close to the Spring 
Equinox, and so had to confront the world from that most 
singular of the Zodiac’s singular points. ... Well, and keep 
in mind where those Masonic Mysteries came from in 
the first place. (Check out Ishmael Reed. He knows more 
about it than you'll ever find here. ) 

We must also never forget famous Missouri Mason 
Harry Truman: sitting by virtue of death in office, this 
every August 1945, with his control-finger poised right on 
Miss. Enola Gay’s atomic clit, making ready to tickle 
100,000 little yellow folks into what will come down as a 
fine vapor-deposit of fat-cracklings wrinkled into the fused 
rubble of their city on the Inland Sea.... 

By the time Bland joined up, the Masons had long, long 
degenerated into just another businessmen’s club, A real 
shame. Business of all kinds, over the centuries, had 
atrophied certain sense-receptors and areas of the human 
brain, so that for most of the fellows taking part, the 
present-day rituals were no more, and even maybe a 
little less, than hollow mummery. Not for all of them, 
though. Now and then you found a throwback. Lyle 
Bland happened to be one. 

The magic in these Masonic rituals is very, very old. 
And way back in those days, it worked. As time went on, 
and it started being used for spectacle, to consolidate what 
were only secular appearances of power, it began to lose 
ats zip. But the words, moves, and machinery have been 
more or less faithfully carried down over the millennia, 
through the grim rationalizing of the World, and so the 
magic is still there, though latent, needing ouly to touch 
the right sensitive head to reassert itself. 

Bland found himself coming home to Beacon Hiil after 
meetings late at night, unable to sleep. He would lie down 
in his study on the davenport, not thinking about any- 
thing in particular, and come back with a jolt, his heart 
pounding terribly, knowing he’d just been somewhere, 


eft, 


686 Graviry’s Rainsow 


but unable to account for the passage of time, The old 
American Empire clock beat in the resonant hallway. The 
Girandole mirror, passed on by generations of Blands, 
gathered images in its quicksilver pool that Lyle couldn't 
bring himself to face. In another room, his wife, varicose 
and religious, groaned in her sleep. What was happening 
to him? 

Next meeting night, home on his back on the ac- 
customed davenport, Wall Street Journal with nothing in 
it he didn’t already know, Lyle Bland rose up out of his 
body, about a foot, face-up, realized where he was and 
gaahh! whoosh back in again. He lay there, more terrified 
than he’d ever been, even at Belleau Wood—not so much 
because he’d left his body, but because he knew that this 
was only a first step. The next step would be to roll over 
in mid-air and look back. Old magic had found him. He 
was off on a journey. He knew he couldn’t keep from 
going on with it. 

It took him a month or two before he could make 
the turn. When it happened, he felt it as a turn not so 
much in space as in his own history. Irreversible. The 
Bland who came back to rejoin the inert white container 
he’d seen belly-up on the sofa, thousands of years beneath 
him, had changed forever. 

Before very long, he was spending most of his time on 
that davenport, and hardly any at all down on State 
Street., His wife, who never questioned anything, moved 
vaguely through the rooms, discussing only household 
affairs, sometimes getting an answer if Bland happened 
to be inside his body, but most often not. Odd-looking 
people began to show up at the door, without phoning. 
Creeps, foreigners with tinted, oily skin, wens, sties, cysts, 
wheezes, bad teeth, limps, staring or—worse—with 
Strange Faraway Smiles. She let them in the house, all 
of them, and the study doors were closed |\gently behind 
them, in her face. She could hear nothing but a murmur 
of voices, in what she guessed to be some foreign tongue. — 
They were instructing her husband in techniques of 
voyage. 

There have happened, though ase in devigrashiodl } 
space, journeys taken northward on very blue, fire-blue 
seas, chilled; crowded by floes, to the final walls of ice. — 


In the Zone 687 


Our judgment lapsed fatally: we paid more attention to 
the Pearys and Nansens who returned—and worse, we 
named what they did “success,” though they failed. Because 
they came back, back to fame, to praise, they failed. We 
only wept for Sir John Franklin and Salomon Andrée: 
mourned their cairns and bones, and missed among the 
poor frozen rubbish the announcements of their victory. 
By the time we had the technology to make such voyages 
easy, we had long worded over all ability to know victory 
or defeat. 

What did Andrée find in the polar silence: what should 
we have heard? 

Bland, still an- apprentice, hadn’t yet shaken off his 
fondness for hallucinating. He knows where he is when 
he’s there, but when he comes back, he imagines that he 
has been journeying underneath history: that history is 
Earth’s mind, and that there are layers, set very deep, 
layers of history analogous to layers of coal and oil in 
Earth’s body. The foreigners sit in his parlor, hissing over 
him, leaving offensive films of sebum on everything they 
touch, trying to see him through this phase, clearly im- 
patient with what they feel are the tastes of a loafer and 
vulgarian. He comes back raving about the presences 
he has found out there, members of an astral IG, whose 
mission—as indeed Rathenau implied through the medium 
of Peter Sachsa—is past secular good and evil: distinctions 
like that are meaningless out there. ... 

“Yess, yess,” all staring at him, “but then why keep 
saying ‘mind and body’? Why make that distinction?” 

Because it’s had to get over the wonder of finding that 
Earth is a living critter, after all these years of thinking 
about a big dumb rock to find a body and psyche, he feels 
like a child again, he knows that in theory he must not 
attach himself, but still he is in love with his sense of 
wonder, with having found it again, even this late, even 
knowing he must soon let it go....To find that Gravity, 
taken so for granted, is really something eerie, Messianic, 
extrasensory in Earth’s mindbody ... having hugged to its 
holy center the wastes of dead species, gathered, packed, 
transmuted, realigned, and rewoven molecules to be taken 
up again by the coal-tar Kabbalists of the other side, the 

ones Bland on his voyages has noted, taken boiled off, 


ay 
, “sa 


688 Gravity's RAINBOW 


teased apart, explicated to every last permutation of use- 
ful magic, centuries past exhaustion still, finding new 
molecular pieces, combining and recombining them into 
new synthetics—“Forget them, they are no better than 
the Qlippoth, the shells of the dead, you must not waste 
your time with them, ...” 

The rest of us, not chosen for enlightenment, left on the 
outside of Earth, at the mercy of a Gravity we have only 
begun to learn how to detect and measure, must go on 
blundering inside our front-brain faith in Kute Korres- 
pondences, hoping that for each psi-synthetic taken from 
Earth’s soul there is a molecule, secular, more or less 
ordinary and named, over here—kicking endlessly among 
the plastic trivia, finding in each Deeper Significance and 
trying to string them all together like terms of a power 
series hoping to zero in on the tremendous and secret 
Function whose name, like the permuted names of God, 
cannot be spoken... plastic saxophone reed sounds of 
unnatural timbre, shampoo bottle ego-image, Cracker Jack 
prize one-shot amusement, home appliance casing fairing 
for winds of cognition, baby bottles tranquilization, meat 
packages disguise of slaughter, dry-cleaning bags infant 
strangulation, garden hoses feeding endlessly the desert 

.. but to bring them together, in their slick persistence 
and our preterition...to make sense out of, to find the 
meanest sharp sliver of truth in so much replication, so 
tnuch waste. . 

Lucky Bland, to be free of it. One night he called his 
whole family together around the davenport in the study. 
Lyle, Jr. came in from Houston, shivering with first-stage 
grippe from contact with a world where air-conditioning 
is not so essential to life. Clara drove down from Ben- 
nington and Buddy rode the MTA in from Cambridge. 
“As you know,” Bland announced, “I have been taking 
these little trips lately.” He was wearing a, simple white 
smock, and holding a red rose. He looked unearthly, all 
were later to agree: his skin and eyes had a clarity which 
is seldom encountered, except on certain spring days, at 
certain latitudes, just before sunrise. “I have found,” he 
continued, “that each time out, I have been traveling 
farther and farther. Tonight, I am going out for good. 
That is, I am not coming back. So I wanted to say good-by 


In the Zone 689 


to you all, and let you know that you'll be provided 
for.” He’d been to see his friend Coolidge (“Hot”) Short, 
of the State Street law firm of Salitieri, Poore, Nash, De 
Brutus, and Short, and made sure all the family finances 
were in perfect order. “I want you to know that I love 
you all. I'd stay here if i could, but I have to go. I hope 
you can understand. 

One by one, his family came up to say good-by. Hugs, 
kisses, handshakes done, Bland sank back into that daven- 
port’s last embrace, closed his eyes with a dim smile. . 
After a bit he felt himself beginning to rise. Those watch- 
ing disagreed about the exact moment. Around 9:30 
Buddy left to see The Bride of Frankenstein, and Mrs. | 
Bland covered the serene face with a dusty chintz drape 
she’d received from a cousin who had never understood 
her taste. 


O 


A windy night. The lids of GI cans blow clanging across 
the parade ground. Sentries in their idleness are practicing 
Queen Anne salutes. Sometimes gusts of wind come that 
rock the jeeps on their springs, even the empty deuce ’n’ 
a halfs and civilian bobtail rigs—shock absorbers groan, 
deeply, in discomfort ...in the peaks of wind, living pine 
trees move, lined above the last sand dropoff into the 
North Sea... . 

Walking at a brisk pace, but out of step, across the 
lorry-scarred spaces of the old Krupp works here, Doctors 
Muffage and Spontoon look anything but conspiratorial. 
You take them immediately for what they seem: a tiny 
beachhead of London respectability here in benighted 
Cuxhaven—tourists in this semicivilized colony of sulfa 
shaken into the wells of blood, syrettes and tourniquets, 
junkie M.O.s and sadistic corpsmen, a colony they were 
spared for the Duration, thank heaven, Muffage’s brother 
being highly placed in a certain Ministry, Spontoon hav- 
ing been technically disqualified because of a strange 
hysterical stigma, shaped like the ace of spades and nearly 
the same color, which would appear on his left cheek at 
moments of high stress, accompanied by severe migraine. 


690 Gravity’s RAINBOW | 


Only a few months ago they felt themselves fully mobi- 
lized as any British civilian, and thus amenable to most 
Government requests. About the present mission, though, 
both now are deep in peacetime second thoughts. How 
quickly history passes these days. 

“I can’t think why he asked us,” Muffage stroking his 
full Imperial (a gesture that manages only to look com- 
pulsive), speaking in a voice perhaps too melodious for a 
man of his mass, “he must know I haven’t done one of 
these since 27.” 

“I assisted at a few whilst I was interning, ” Spontoon 
recalls. “That was during the great vogue they had at 
mental institutions, you know.” 

“I can name you a few National Institutions where it’s 
still in vogue.” The medicos share a chuckle, full of that 
British Weltschmerz that looks so uncomfortable on the 
faces of the afflicted. “See here, then, Spontoon, you'd 
rather assist me, is that it?” 

“Oh, either way you know. I mean it’s not as if there'll 
be some chap with a book standing there, you know, 
writing it all down.” 

“I wouldn’t be too sure. Weren't you listening? Didn’t 
you notice anything .. 

“Enthusiastic.” 

“Obsessional. I wonder if Pointsman isn’t losing his 
grip,” sounding here remarkably like , James Mason: 
“L(h)oo-ssing(?) hiss khrip.” 

They are looking at each other now, separate night 
scapes of Marston shelters and parked vehicles flowing 
darkly by together behind each face. The wind carries 
smells of brine, of beach, of petrol. A distant radio tuned 
to the General Forces Programme featitiens Sandy Mae- 
Pherson at the soni 

“Oh, all of us. ” Spontoon begins, ‘but ete it lapse. 

“Here we are.” 

The bright office is hung with Bite Ae sausage- 


limbed Petty Girl pin-ups. A coffee mes reebsoie in the — 


e-dubbing. A 


corner. There’s also a smell of rancid 


corporal sits with his feet on a desk, cr i in’ an 


American Bugs Bunny comic book. ’ te. 
“Slothrop,” in answer to Muffage’s” inquiry, Soya ‘aie 
the Yank in the, the pig suit. Well, he’s in and out all the 


b 


i 


In the Zone. - 691 


time. Completely dotty. What are you lot a M.L.6 or 
something?” 

“Can’t discuss it,” raps Spontoon. Fancies himself a bit 
of a Nayland Smith, Spontoon does. “D’you know where 
we might find a General Wivern?” 

“This time of night? Down at the alcohol dump, most 
likely. Follow the tracks, head for all the noise. If I 
weren't on duty, I'd be there m’self.” 

“Pig suit,” frowns Muffage. 

“Big bloody pig suit, yellow, pink, and blue, on my 
oath,” replies the corporal. “You'll know him when you — 
see him. You wouldn’t have a cigarette, one of you gentle- 
men, by any chance.” 

Sounds of carousing reach them as they trudge along 
ric! tracks, past empty triple flats and tank cars. “Alcohol 

um: 

“Fuel for their Nazi rockets, I’m told. If they ever get 
one in working order.” 

Under a cold umbrella of naked light bulbs are gath- 
ered a crowd of Army personnel, American sailors, NAAFI 
girls, and German friuleins. Fraternizing, every last one of 
them, shamefully, amid noise which becomes, as Muffage 
and Spontoon reach the edge of the gathering, a song, at 
whose center, with a good snootful, each arm circling a 
smiling and disheveled young tootsie, ruddy face under 
these lights gone an apoplectic mauve, and leading the 
glee, is the same General Wivern they last saw in Points- 
man’s: office back at Twelfth House. From a: tank car 
whose contents, ethanol, 75% solution, are announced in 
stark white stenciling along the side, spigots protrude here 
and there, under which an incredible number of mess cups, 
china mugs, coffeepots, wastebaskets, and other containers 
are being advanced and withdrawn. Ukuleles, kazoos, 
harmonicas, and any number of makeshift metal noise- 
makers accompany the song, which is an innocent salute 
‘to Postwar, a hope that the end of shortages, the end of 
Austerity, is near: 


It’s— 
Mouthtrip-ping timel 
- Mouthtrip-ping timel 
( Time to open up that icebox door— 


Se 


692 Graviry’s Rainsow 


Oh yes it’s 

Mouthtrip-ping time, 

Mouthtrip-ping time, 

And once you've eaten some, you'll come, for morel 
Ah, mouthtrip-ping time, 

Mouthtrip-ping time! 

It’s something old, but also very new-w-w— 

Life’s so sublime, 

In mouthtrip-ping time— 

We hope you're all mouthtrip-ping, toooooo! 


Next chorus is soldiers ’n’ sailors all together for the first 
eight bars, girls for the second, General Wivern singing 
the next eight solo, and tutti to finish it up. Then comes a 
chorus for ukuleles and kazoos and so on while everyone 
dances, black neckerchiefs whipping about like the mus- 
taches of epileptic villains, delicate snoods unloosening to 
allow stray locks of hair to escape their tight rolls, skirt- 
hems raised to expose flashing knees and slips edged in 
prewar Cluny lace a frail flight of smoky bat-wings here 
under the white electricity . . . on the final chorus the boys 
circle clockwise, girls anticlockwise, the ensemble opening 
out into a rose-pattern, from the middle of which dissi- 
patedly leering tosspot General Wivern, tankard aloft, is 
hoisted briefly, like an erect stamen. 

About the only one not participating here, aside from 
the two prowling surgeons, is Seaman Bodine, whom we 
left, you recall, carrying on in the bathtub at Sdure 
Bummer’s place back in Berlin. Impeccable tonight in dress 
whites, straight-faced and sober, he trudges among the | 
merrymakers, thickly sprouting hair from jumper sleeves i 
and V-neck, so much of it that last week he spooked and 
lost a connection just in from the CBI theatre with close to _ 
a ton of bhang, who mistook him for a seagoing version of 
the legendary yeti or abominable snowman. To make up 
some of what he blew on that one, Bodine iis tonight pro- 
moting the First International Runcible Spoon Fight, be- 
tween his shipmate Avery Purfle and an English Com- — 
mando named St. John Bladdery. “Place at bets, yes yes 
the odds are even, 50/50,” announces suave croupier | 
Bodine, pushing through the gathered bodies, many of — 
them far from upright, one shaggy hand clutching a wad 
of occupation scrip. With the other, from time to time, he 
will tug the big collar of his jumper around and blow his _ 


In the Zone 693 


nose on it, grommets on the hem of his T-shirt blinking, 
light bulbs dancing overhead in the wind he’s raised, ‘his 
own several shadows thrashing in all directions and merg- 
ing with others. 

“Greetings, gate, need an opiate?” Tiny red eyes in a 
vast pink Jell-o of a face, and an avaricious smile, It is 
Albert Krypton, corpsman striker of the U.S.S. John E. 
Badass, who now produces from inside a secret jumper 
pocket a glass vial full of white tablets. “Codeine, Jackson, 
it’s beautiful—here.” 

_ Bodine sneezes violently and wipes the snot away with 
his sleeve. “Not for any fucking cold, Krypton. Thanks, 
You seen Avery?” . 

“He’s in great shape. He was getting in some last-minute 
practice down the goat hole when I came over.” 

“Listen, old buddy,” begins the’ enterprising tar. This 
decrypts into 3 ounces of cocaine. Bodine comes up with 
a few squashed notes. “Midnight, if you can. Told him I’d 
see him out at Putzi’s after the fight.” 

“Solid. Hey, you checked under the barracks lately?” 
Seems the CBI returnees get together to play marbles with 
opium balls. You can pick up hundreds if you're any good. 
Corpsman Krypton pockets his money and leaves Bodine 
flexing his thumb and thinking about it, moves on copping 
feels, pausing to drink from a shell case of grain alcohol 
and grapefruit juice, whilst dealing the odd tablet of 
codeine. He has a brief paranoid episode as two red-hatted 
MPs show up, stroking their billy clubs and giving him, he 
fancies, pregnant looks. He slides into the night, peeling 
away, banking through dark sky. He is coming on to a_ 
proprietary mixture known as the Krypton Blue, and so it 
is a giddy passage to the dispensary, not without moments 
of deep inattention. 

Inside, his connection, Pharmacist Birdbury, is conduct- 
ing the last act of La Forza del Destino crackling in from 
Radio Luxembourg, and singing along. His mouth snaps 
shut as Krypton comes taxiing in. With him is what ap- _ 
pears to be a gigantic, multicolored pig, the plush nap of _ 
its coat reversed here and there, which widens the possible 
range of colors. “Micrograms,” Krypton striking his head 
dramatically, “that’s. right, micrograms, not milligrams. 
Birdbury, gimme something, I’ve OD’d.” . 
' “Ssh.” The dispenser’s high forehead wrinkling in and 


Ba ns = 


694 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


out of operatical cross-furrows. Krypton goes back in 
among the shelves, and watches the lighted room through 
a bottle of paregoric till the opera’s over. Comes back in 
time to hear the pig asking, “Well where else would he 
head for?” 

. “I got it third-hand,” Birdbury laying down the hype- 
dermic he’s been using as a baton. “Ask Krypton here, he 
gets around a bit.” 

“Greetings, gate,” sez Albert, “let’s inoculate.” 

“I hear Springer is supposed to be coming in tonight.” 

“First I’ve heard. But go on out to Putzi’s, why don’t 
you. That’s where all that sort of thing goes on.” 

The pig looks up at a clock on the wall. “Got a. funny 
schedule tonight, is all.” 

“Look here, Krypton, there’s a bigwig from SPOG due 
in here any moment, so whatever it was, you know. . 
They haggle over the three ounces .of cocaine, the pig 
politely withdrawing to leaf through an old News of the 
World. Presently, taping the last of the crystal-stuffed 
bottles to his bare leg, Krypton invites everyone to the _ 
runcible spoon fight. “Bodine’s holding some big money, 
folks in from all over the Zone—” 

“Seaman Bodine?” inquires the amazed plush pig. 

“The king of Cuxhaven, Porky.” 

“Well I ran him an errand once in Berlin. Tell him 
Rocketman sez howdy.” 

Krypton, bellbottom pulled up, opening one bottle just 
to see what he has, pauses, gogeling. “You mean that — 


Krypton snuffs a big fingerful of the flaky white into : 
nostrils right ’n’ left. The world goes clarifying. Bitter snot © 
begins to form in a stubbom fist at the back of his throat. j 
Already the Potsdam Pickup is part of the folklore of the — 
Zone. Would this pig here be trying to cash in on the — 
glory of Rocketman (whose existence Krypton has never | 
been that sure of)? Cocaine suspicions, ging and mean | 
as rats... shining bottles of a thousand el voices from | 
the radio, the drape and hand of the pig’s shag coat as | 
Krypton reaches out to stroke... no, it’s clear that the pig _ 
isn’t looking for anything, isn’t a cop, isn’t dealing, or abou 
to hustle anybody. ... “Just wanted to see how it felt, you 
know,” sez Krypton. 


In the Zone 695 


“Sure.” Now the doorway is suddenly full of red hats, 
eather and brass. Krypton stands very still, the top to the 
pen cocaine bottle in one hand. 

“Slothrop?” sergeant in command comes edging into the 
oom, hand resting on his sidearm, The pig looks over at 
sirdbury, who’s shaking his head no, not me, as if he 
neans it. 

“Wasn't me, either,” Krypton feels he ought to mention. 

“Well somebody blew. the whistle,” the pig mutters, 
ooking really hurt. « 

“Stand by,” whispers Albert. To the MP: “Excuse me,” 
noseying straight over to the wall switch, which he flicks 
ff, Slothrop at once dashing through all the shouting past 
irdbury’s desk wham into a tall rack of medicines his 
ttaw stomach bounces: him off of, but which then falls 
ver on somebody else with a stupendous glass crash and 
cream—on down a pitchblack aisle, arms out to guide 
im, to the back exit, where he meets Krypton. 

“Thanks.” -.. 

“Quick.” 

Outside they cut eastward, toward the Elbe and the 
ocks, pounding along, skidding in mudpuddles, stumbling 
ver lorry-ruts, wind sweeping among the Quonsets to bat 
1em in the face, cocaine falling in little white splashes 
om undermeath Krypton’s left bellbottom. Behind them 
1¢ posse are hollering and shining flashlights, but don’t 
em to know where they've gone. Good. “Follow the 
ellow-brick road,” hums Albert Krypton, on pitch, “fol- 
w the yellow-brick road,” what’s this, is he actually, yes 
e's skipping.... 

Presently, out of breath, they arrive at the pier where 
¢ Badass and its division, four haze-gray piglets, are tied 
p, to find the runcible spoon fiight just under way at the 
nter of a weaving, cheering crowd of civilian and military 
runks. Stringy Avery Purfle, sideburns slick as seal’s fur in 
@ pallid light, Adam’s apple working in and out at a 
rvous four or five cycles a minute, shuffles around his 
ponent, the serene and oxlike St. John Bladdery, both 
ith runcible spoons in the on-guard position, filed edges 
‘ight. 

Krypton stashes Slothrop in a garbage bin and goes 
oking for Seaman Bodine. After a number of short, glit- — 
ring feints, Purfle dodges in, quick as a fighting-cock. 


7. 
ers: 5 


696 Gravity's RAaInsow 


With a high slash that Bladdery tries to parry in third, 
Purfle rips through the Commando’s blouse and draws 
blood. But when he goes to jump back, it seems thoughtful 
Bladdery has brought his combat boot down on the 
American’s low dress shoe, nailing him where he stands. 

Promoter Bodine and his two combatants are burning 
crystals of awareness in this poisoned gray gathering: a 
good half of the crowd are out in the foothills of uncon- 
sciousness, and the rest are not exactly sure what’s going 
on. Some think that Purfle and Bladdery are really mad at 
each other. Others feel that it is meant to be comedy, and 
they will laugh at inappropriate moments. Now and then 
the odd beady eyes will appear up in the night super- 
structures of the warships, staring, staring... . 

Purfle and Bladdery have made simultaneous thrusts and 
are now corps d corps—with a scrape and clank the run- 
cible spoons are locked, and elbows tense and set. The 
outcome rests with scrawny Purfle’s gift for trickery, since 
Bladdery appears ready to hold the position all night. 

“Rocketman’s here,” Krypton tugging at Bodine’s damp 
wrinkled collar, “in a pig suit.” 

“Not now, man. You got the, ah—” 
“But but the heat’s after him, Bodine, where can we 
hide him?” 

“Who cares, it’s some asshole, is all, A fake. locketiaatl 
wouldn’t be here.” 

Purfle yanks his runcible-spoon hand back, leaning to 
the side, twisting his own weapon to keep its tines inter- 
locked with those of Bladdery’s, pulling the commando 
off-balance long enough to release his own foot, then deftly 
unlinking the spoons and dancing away. Bladdery recovers 
his footing and moves heavily in pursuit, probing in with a 
series of jabs then shifting the spoon to his other hand and 
surprising Purfle with a slash that grazes the sailor’s neck, 
missing the jugular, but not by much. Blood drips into the 
white jumper, black under these arclights. Sweat and cold 
shadows lie darkly in the men’s armpits. Purfle, made 
reckless by the pain, goes flying at Bladdery, a flurry of 
blind wild pokes and hackings, Bladdery hardly needing 

to move his feet, weaving from the knees up like a great 
assured pudding, finally able to grab Purfle’s spoon hand 
at the wrist and twirl him about, like jitterbugging a girl, 
around in front of him, his own knife-edge now up and bi- 


» - 7 te Te AP 
b toy alle 
7) 9) Epa 


In the Zone 697 


secting Purfle’s Adam’s apple, ready to slice in. He looks 
up, around, wheezing, sweaty, seeking some locus of 
power that will thumb-signal him what to do. 

Nothing: only sleep, vomiting, shivering, a ghost and 
flowered odor of ethanol, solid Bodine counting his money. 
Nobody really watching. ‘It then comes to Bladdery and 
Purfle at once, tuned to one another at the filed edge of 
this’ runcible spoon and the negligible effort it will take to 
fill their common world with death, that nobody said any- 
thing about a fight to the finish, right? that each will get 
part of the purse whoever wins, and so the sensible course 
is to break it up now, jointly to go hassle Bodine, and find 
some Band-Aids and iodine. And still they linger in their 
embrace, Death in all its potency humming them romantic 
tunes, chiding them for moderate little men... So far and 
no farther, is that it? You call that living? 

An MP car, horn and siren and lights all going, ap- 
proaches. Reluctantly, Purfle and Bladdery do relax, and, 
sighing out of puffed cheeks, part. Bodine, ten feet away, 
tosses over the heads of the awakening crowd a fat packet 
of scrip which the Commando catches, riffle-splits, and 
gives half of to Purfle, who’s already on route to the gang- 
plank of his gray mother the John E. Badass, where the 
quarterdeck watch are looking more lively, and even a 
card game in the ship’s laundry breaking up so everybody 
can go watch the big bust. Drunkards ashore begin to mill, 
sluggish and with no sense of direction. From beyond the 
pale of electric light comes a rush of girls, shivering, 
aroused, beruffled, to witch St. John Bladdery away under 
cover of pretty-pastel synthetics and amorous squeals. 
Bodine and Krypton, hipwriggling and cursing their way 
through the crowd, stumbling over wakers and sleepers, 
stop by the dumpster to collect Slothrop, who rises from a 
pile of eggshells, beer cans, horrible chicken parts in yel- 
low gravy, coffee grounds and waste paper spilling or 
clattering off of him, raises his mask, and smiles howdy at 
Bodine. 

“Rocketman, holy shit, it really is. What’s happening, 
o! buddy?” 

“Been double-crossed, need a ride to Putzi’s.” Lorries 
have been showing up, into whose canvas shadows MPs 
are beginning to load everybody slower-moving than they 
are. Now two civilians, one with a beard, come charging 


i Py we ee ee 


- 


698 Gravirty’s RAINBOW 


down the pier, hollering, “A pig suit, a pig suit, there, 
look,” and, “You—Slothrop—stay where you are.” 

Not about to, Slothrop with a great clank and crunch 
rolls out of the garbage and at a dead run follows Bodine 
and Krypton, chickenfat flowing away, eggshells flying off 
behind him, A Red Cross Clubmobile or canteen truck is 
parked down at the next nest of destroyers, its light spilling 
neatly square on the asphalt, a pretty girl with a Deanna 
Durbin hairdo framed inside against stacks of candy bars, 
cigarettes, chock-shaped sandwiches in waxed paper. 

“Coffee, boys?” she smiles, “how about some sand- 
wiches? We're sold out of everything tonight but ham,” 
then seeing Slothrop, “oh, dear, I’m sorry... .” 

“Keys to the truck,” Bodine coming up with a Cagney 
sneer and nickel-plated handgun, “c'mon,” cocking the 
hammer. 

Tough frown, shoulderpadded shrug. “In the ignition, 
Jackson.” Albert Krypton climbs in the back to keep her 
company while Slothrop and Bodine jump in front and 
get under way in a tight, screeching U-tum it as the two 
civilians come running up. 

“Now who th’ hell’s zat,” Slothrop looking ache out die 
window at their shouting shapes diminishing, “did you 
check that one bird with the ace of spades on his cheek?” 

Bodine swerves past the disturbance around the John E. 
Badass and gives everybody the obligatory finger. Slothrop 
slouches back in the seat, putting the pig mask up like a 
knight’s beaver, reaching over to pry a pack of cigarettes 
out of Bodine’s jumper pocket, lighting one up, weary, © 
wishing he could just sleep. ... In back of him suddenly — 
the Red Cross girl shrieks, “My God, what’s that?” 

“Look,” Krypton patiently, ‘ ‘you get some on the end of — 
your finger, right, then you close off one half of your 
nose, a-and—” 

“It’s cocaine!” the girl’s voice rising to an alarming in- 
tensity, “is what it is! It’s heroin! You're dope fiends! and 
you've kidnapped me! Oh. my God! This is a, don’t you 
realize, its a Red Cross Clubmobile! It’s the property of 
the Red Cross! Oh, you can’t do this! I’m with the Red 
Cross! Oh, help me, somebody! They’re dope fiends! Oh, 
please! Help! Stop and let me out! Take the truck if you” 
want, take everything in it, but oh please ssi t—” sf 


—— oe So 


_ In the Zone 699 


“Steer a minute,” Bodine turning around and pointing 
his shiny pistol at the girl. 

“You can’t shoot me,” she screams, “you hoodlum, who 
do you think you are, hijacking Red Cross property! Why 
don’t you just—go somewhere and—sniff your dope and— 
leave us alone!” 

“Cunt,” advises Seaman Bodine, in a calm and reason- 
able tone, “you are wrong. I can shoot you. Right? Now, 
you happen to be working for the same warm and wonder- 
ful organization that was charging fifteen cents for coffee 
and doughnuts, at the Battle of the fucking Bulge, if you 
really wanna get into who is stealing what from who.” 

“Whom,” she replies in a much smaller voice, lower lip 
quivering kind of cute and bitchy it seems to Slothrop, 
checking it out in the rear-view mirror as Bodine takes 
over the wheel again. 

“Oho, what's this,” Krypton watching her ass, “what 
have we here,” shifting under its khaki skirt as she stands 
with long legs braced for their rattling creaking 60 or 70 
miles an hour and Bodine’s strange cornering techniques, 
which look to be some stylized form of suicide. 

“What's your name?” Slothrop smiling, an avuncular pig. 

“Shirley.” 

“Tyrone. Howdy.” 

“Tra-la-la,” Krypton now looting the cash register, gob- 
bling Hershey bars and stuffing his socks with packs of 
smokes, “love in bloom.” About then Bodine slams on the 
brakes and goes into a great skid, ass end of their truck 
slewing toward an icy-lit tableau of sentries in white-sten- 
ciled helmet liners, white belts, white holsters, a barricade 
across the road, an officer runing toward a jeep hunched 
up and hollering into a walkie-talkie. 

“Roadblock? What the shit,” Bodine grinding it into 
reverse, various goodies for the troops crashing off of their 
shelves as the truck lurches around. Shirley loses her foot- 
ing and staggers forward, Krypton grabbing for her as 
Slothrop leans to take the handgun off the dashboard, 
finding her half-draped over the front seat when he gets 
back around to the window. “Where the fuck is low now? 
What is it, a Red Cross gearbox, you got to put a nickel 
in someplace to get it in gear, hey Shirley?” 

“Oh, goodness,” Shirley squirming over into the front 


700 Gravity's RaInBsow 


between them, grabbing the shift, “like this, you drip.” 
Gunshots behind them. 

“Thank you,” sez Bodine, and, leaving rubber in a 
pungent smoking shriek, they’re off again. 

“You're really hot, Rocketman, wow,” Krypton lying in 
back offering ankle and taped cocaine bottle to Shirley 
with a smile, 


“Do tell.” 
“No thanks,” sez Shirley. “Td noally better not.” 
“C'mon... aw. 


“Were those snowdrops back there?” Slothrop squinting 
into the lampshine ahead, “GIsP What're GIs doing here 
in the British sector, do you know?” 

“Maybe not,” Bodine guesses, “maybe only Shore Patrol, 
c'mon, let's not get any more paranoid than we 
tO... 

“Sok, see, I'm doing cou it and I’m not growing 
(snuff) fangs or anything. 

“Well; I just don’t know. "Shirley kneeling backwards, 
breasts propped on the back of the seat, one big smooth 
country-girl hand on Slothrop’s shoulder for balance. 

“Look,” Bodine sez, “is it currency, or dope, or what? 
I just like to know what to expect, cause if the heat’s 
re) ees ~ 

“Only on me, far as I know. This is nothing to do with 
dealing, it’s a whole different drill.” 

“She’s the rose of no-man’s laaaand,” sings Albert Kryp- 
ton, coaxing. 

“Why you going to Putzi’sP” 

“Got to see that Springer.” 

“Didn’t know he was coming in.” 

“Why does everybody keep saying that?” 

“Rebebber, dow,” Shirley talking with only one nostril 
here, “dot too buch, Albert, just a teensy bit.” 

“Just that nobody’s seen him for a while.” 

“Be inhaling now, good, good, O.K., now. Umm, there’s 
a little still, uh, kind of a booger that’s blocking it...do 
it again, right. Now the other one.” | . 

“Albert, you said only one.” 

“Look, Rocky, if you do get base 

“Don’t want to think.” 
“Jeepers,” sez Shirley. 


eat Sei Sex 


EES NIDA Fe 5 oer whey 


In the Zone 701 


“You like thatP Here, just do a little more.” 

“What'd you do?” 

“Nothing. Wanted to talk to somebody at that SPOG. 
Find out what was happening. We were just supposed to 
talk, you know, off the record, tonight in the dispensary. 
Neutral ground. Instead The Man shows up. Now there 
are also these other two creeps in civvies.” 

“You a spy, or something?” __ 

“Wish I was even that. Oh boy. I should’ve known 
better.” ~ ; 

“Well it sounds pretty bad.” And Seaman Bodine drives 
along not liking it much, brooding, growing sentimental. 
“Say,” presently, “if they do, well, catch up with you, I 
could get in touch with your Mom, or something.” 

“My—’ A sharp look. “No, no, no...” 

“Well, somebody.” 

“Can’t think of a soul.” 

“Wow, Rocketman. .. .” 

Putzi’s turns out to be a sprawling, half-fortified manor 
house dating from the last century, off the Dorum road 
and seaward down a sandy pair of wheel-tracks with reeds 
and tough dune grass growing in between, the house 
perched like a raft atop a giant comber of.a sandhill that 
sweeps upward from a beach whose grade is so subtle 
that it becomes water only by surprise, tranquil, salt-pale, 
stretching miles into the North Sea like clouds, here and 
there more silver, long cell or skin shapes, tissue-thin, 
stilled under the moon, reaching out toward Helgoland, 

The place never got requisitioned. Nobody has ever 
seen the owner, or even knows if “Putzi” is anybody real. 
Bodine drives the truck right on into what used to be the 
stable and.they all get out, Shirley hoorahing in the moon- 
light, Krypton mumbling oboy, oboy through big mouth- 
fuls of that frau bait. There is some password and security 
hassle at the door, on account of the pig getup, but Slo- 
throp flashes his white plastic knight and that works. In- 
side they find a brightly lit and busy combination bar, 
opium den, cabaret, casino and house of ill repute, all 
its rooms swarming with soldiers, sailors, dames, tricks, 
winners, losers, conjurors, dealers, dopers, voyeurs, homo- 
sexuals, fetishists, spies and folks just looking for company, 

all talking, singing or raising hell at a noise level the 


Ee 


702 Gravity’s Rainsow — “ 


house’s silent walls seal off completely from the outside. 
Perfume, smoke, alcohol, and sweat glide through the ~ 
house in turbulences too gentle to feel or see. It’s a floating 
celebration no one’s thought to adjourn: a victory party so 
ermanent, so easy at gathering newcomer and old regu- 
‘be to itself, that who can say for sure which victory? 
which war? | 

Springer is nowhere in sight, and from what Slothrop 
can gather from random questioning won't be by till later, 
if at all. Now this happens to be the very delivery date 
for that discharge they arranged sailing in with Frau 
Gnahb to Stralsund. And tonight, of all nights, after a 
week of not bothering him, the police decide to come 
after Slothrop. Oh yes, yes indeed NNNNNNNN Good — 
Evening Tyrone Slothrop We Have Been Waiting For — 
You. Of Course We Are Here. You Didn't Think We Had — 
Just Faded Away, No, No Tyrone, We Must Hurt You 
Again If You Are Going To Be That Stupid, Hurt You 
Again and Again Yes Tyrone You Are So Hopeless So Stupid 
And Doomed. Are You Really Supposed To Find Anything? 
What If It Is Death Tyrone? What If We Don’t Want 
You To Find Anything? If We Don’t Want To Give You 
Your Discharge You'll Just Go On Like This Forever 
Won't You? Maybe We Want You Only To Keep On. 
You Don’t Know Do You Tyrone. What Makes You Think 
You Can Play As Well As We Can? You Can’t. You Think 
You're Good But You're Really Shit And We All Know It. 
That Is In Your Dossier, (Laughter. Humming.) 

Bodine finds him sitting inside a coat closet, chai 
on a velvet ear of his mask. “You look bad, Rocky. This is 
Solange. She’s a masseuse.” She is smiling, quizzical, a — 
child brought to visit the weird pig in his cave. 

“I’m sorry. I’m sorry.” 

“Let me take you down to the baths,” the woman’s 
voice a soapy sponge already caressing at his troubles, “tt 8 
very quiet, restful. . 

“Til be around all night,” Bodine sez. “Tl tell you if j 
Springer shows.” 

“This is some kind of a shee right?” Siokiuci sucking 
saliva from velvet pile. 

“Everything is some kind of a plot, man,” Bodine laugh 
ing, 


Y 
4 
b 
4 
3 


In the Zone : 703 


“And yes but, the arrows are pointing all different ways,” 
Solange illustrating with a dance of hands, red-pointed 
fingervectors. Which is Slothrop’s first news, out loud, that 
the Zone can sustain many other plots besides those polar- 
ized upon himself... that these are the els and busses of 
an enormous transit system here in the Raketenstadt, more 
tangled even than Boston’s—and that by riding each 
branch the proper distance, knowing when to transfer, 
keeping some state of minimum grace though it might 
often look like he’s headed the wrong way, this network 
of all plots may yet carry him to freedom. He understands 
that he should not be so paranoid of either Bodine or 
Solange, but ride instead their kind underground awhile, 
see where it takes him.... 

Solange leads Slothrop off to the baths, and Bodine con- 
tinues to search for his customer, 21% bottles of cocaine 
clinking and clammy against his bare stomach under his 
skivvy shirt. The Major isn’t at any of the poker or crap 
games, nor attending the floor show wherein one Yo- 
lande, blonde and shining all over with baby oil, dances 
table to table picking up florin pieces and sovereigns, often 
hot from the flame of some joker’s Zippo, between the 
prehensile lips of her cunt—nor is he drinking, nor, ac- 
cording to Monika, Putzi’s genial, cigar-smoking, mate- 
lassé-suited madame, is he screwing. He hasn’t been by to 
hassle the piano player for “San Antonio Rose.” It takes 
Bodine half an hour before colliding with the man finally, 
realing out the swinging doors of a pissoir, groggy from a 
confrontation with the notorious Ejisenkréte, known 
throughout the Zone as the ultimate test of manhood, be- 
fore which bemedaled and brevetted Krautkillers, as well 
as the baddest shit-on-my-dick-or-blood-on-my-blade es- 
capees from the grossest of Zonal stockades, all have been 
known to shrink, swoon, chicken out; and on occasion 
vomit, yes right where they stood. For it is indeed an 
Iron Toad, faithfully rendered, thousand-warted and some 
say faintly smiling, a foot long at its longest, lurking at 
the bottom of a rank shit-stained toilet and hooked up to 
the European Grid through a rheostat control rigged to 
deliver varying though not lethal surges of voltage and 
current. No one knows who sits behind the secret rheo- 
stat (some say it’s the half-mythical Putzi himself), or if it 


704 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


isn’t in fact hooked up to an automatic timer, for not every- 
body gets caught, really—you can piss on the Toad with- 
out anything at all happening. But you just never know. 
Often enough to matter, the current will be there—pi- 
ranha-raid and salmon-climb up the gold glittering fall of 
piss, your treacherous ladder of salts and acids, bringing 
you back into touch with Mother Ground, the great, the 
planetary pool of electrons making you one with your 
prototype, the legendary poor drunk, too drunk to know 
anything, pissing on some long-ago third rail and ful- 
minated to charcoal, to epileptic night, his screams not even 
his own but the electricity’s, the amps speaking through 
his already shattering vessel, shattered too soon for them 
even to begin to say it, voice their terrible release from 
silence, nobody listening anyhow, some watchman poking 
down the track, some old man unable to sleep out for a 
walk, some city drifter on a bench under a million June 
bugs in green nimbus around the streetlight, his neck re- 
laxing and tightening in and out of dreams and maybe it 
was only a cat screwing, a church bell in a high wind, a 
window being broken, no direction to: it, not even alarm- 
ing, replaced swiftly by the old, the coal-gas and Lysol, 
silence. And somebody else finds him next morning, Or 
you can find him any night at Putzi’s if you’re man enough 
to go in piss on that Toad. The Major has got off this time 
with only a mild jolt, and is in a self-congratulating mood. 
“Ugly ’sucker tried his best,” wrapping an arm about 
Bodine’s neck, “but got his warty ol’ ass handed to him 
tonight, damn ’f he didn’t.” 
“Got your ‘snow,’ Major Marvy. Half a bottle shy, sorry, | 
it’s the best I could do.” 
“That's all reet, sailor. I know so many nose habits be- _ 
tween here ’n’ Wiesbaden you'd need three fon ’n’ that | 
wouldn’t last the ’suckers a day.” He pays off Bodine, full 
price, overriding Bodine’s offer to prorate for what’s 
missing. “Call it a little lagniappe, goodbuddy, that’s | 
Duane Marvy’s way o’ doin’ thangs. Damn that ol’ toad’s | 
got my pecker to feelin’ pretty good now. Damn f I ~ 
wouldn’t like to stick it inside one them little whores. Heyl 
Boats, where can I find me some pussy around here?” — 
The sailor shows him how to get downstairs to the — 
whorehouse, They take you into a kind of private steam 


In the Zone 705 


bath first, you can screw right there if you want, doesn’t 
cost any extra. The madame—hey]! ha, ha! looks like some 
kind of a dyke with that stogie in her face! raises an eye- 
brow at Marvy when he tells her he wants a nigger, but 
thinks she can get hold of one. 

“It isn’t the House of All Nations, but we do aim for 
variety,” running the tortoise end of her cigar-holder down 
a call-sheet, “Sandra is engaged for the moment. An ex- 
hibition. In the meantime, here is our delightful Manuela, 
to keep you company.” 

Manuela is wearing only a high comb and black-lace 
mantilla, shadow-flowers falling to her hips, a professional 
smile for the fat American, who is already fumbling with 
uniform buttons. 

“Hubba, hubba! Hey, she’s pretty sunburned herself. 
Ain’tchaP You got a leetle mulatto in there, a leetle May- 
heecano, honey? You sabe espafiolP You sabe fucky-fucky?” 

“Si,” deciding tonight to be from the Levante, “I am 
Spanish. I from Valencia.” 

“Va-len-cia-a-a,” sings Major Marvy, to the well-known 
tune of the same name, “Sefiorita, fucky-fucky, sucky- 
sucky sixty-ni-i-ine, la-lalala la-la la-la laaa...” dancing 
her in a brief two-step about the grave center of the wait- 
ing madame. 

Manuela doesn’t feel obliged to join in. Valencia was 
one of the last cities to fall to Franco, She herself is really 
from the Asturias, which knew him first, felt his cruelty 
two years before the civil war even began for the rest of 
Spain. She watches Marvy’s face as he pays Monika,- 
watches him in this primal American act, paying, more 
deeply himself than when coming, or asleep, or maybe 
even dying. Marvy isn’t her first, but almost her first, 
American. The clientele here at Putzi’s is mostly British. 
During the War—how many camps and cities since her 
capture in ’38P—it was German. She missed the Inter- 

national Brigades, shut away up in her cold green moun- 
_ tains and fighting hit-and-run long after the Fascists had 
occupied all the north—missed the flowers, children, kisses, 
_ and many tongues of Barcelona, of Valencia where she’s 
| never been, Valencia, this evening’s home.... Ya salimos 
_ de Espafia.... Pa’ luchar en otros frentes, ay, Manuela, 
| ay, Manuela.... 


a 


706 Graviry’s Rainsow 


She hangs his uniform neatly in a closet and follows her 
trick into heat, bright steam, the walls of the seething 
room invisible, feathered hairs along his legs, enormous 
buttocks and back beginning to come up dark with the 
dampness. Other souls move, sigh, groan unseen amon 
the sheets of fog, dimensions in here under the 
meaningless—the room could be any size, an entire city’s 
breadth, paved with birds not entirely gentle in twofold 
rotational symmetry, a foot-darkened yellow and blue, the 
only colors to its watery twilight, 

“Aaabbh, hot damn,” Marvy slithering fatly down, sleek 
with sweat, over the tiled edge into the scented water. His 
toenails, cut Army-square, slide under last. “Come on, 
everybody in the pool,” a great happy bellow, seizing 
Manuela’s ankle and tugging. Having taken a fall or two 
on these tiles, and seen a girl friend go into traction, 
Manuela comes along gracefully, falling hard enough 
astraddle, bottom hitting his stomach a loud smack, to hurt 
him, she hopes. But he only laughs again, loudly aban- 
doned to the warmth and buoyancy and sounds encom- 
passing—anonymous fucking, drowsiness, ease. Finds hita- 
self with a thick red hardon, and slips it without ado into 
the solemn girl half-hidden inside her cloud of damp black 
Spanish lace, eyes anyplace but on his, aswing now 
through the interior fog, dreaming of home. 

Well, that’s all reet. He isn’t fucking her eyes, is he? 
He’d rather not have to look at her face anyhow, all he 
wants is the brown skin, the shut mouth, that sweet and 
nigger submissiveness. She'll do anything he orders, yeah 
he can hold her head under the water till she drowns, he 
can bend her hand back, yeah, break her fingers like that 
cunt in Frankfurt the other week. Pistol-whip, bite till 
blood comes . . . visions go swarming, violent, less erotic 
than you think—more occupied with thrust, impact, pene- 
tration, and such other military yalues. Which is not to say 
he isn’t enjoying himself innocently as you do. Or that 
Manuela doesn’t find herself too, in some casual 
way, liking the ride up and down the stubborn red shaft 
of Major Marvy, though her mind is on a thousand other — 
things now, a frock of Sandra’s that she covets, words to _ 
various songs, an itch below her left shoulderblade, a tall 
English soldier she saw as she came through the bar around 


In the Zone 707. 


suppertime, his brown forearm, shirt rolled to the elbow, 
against the zinc top of the table. . 

Voices in the steam. Alarms, many feet clopping in 
shower shoes, silhouettes moving by, a gray cloudy evacu- 
ation. “What in thee hell,” Major Marvy about to come, 
rising on his elbows distracted, squinting in several direc- 
tions, rapidly getting a softoff. 

“Raid,” a voice going past. “MPs,” shivers somebody 

else, 
“Gaaabh!l” screams Major Marvy, who has just recalled 
the presence of 244 ounces of cocaine in his uniform 
pockets. He rolls, walrus-heavy, Manuela sliding away and 
off his limpening nervous penis, hardly aroused but enough 
of a professional to feel the price includes a token puto and 
sinvergiienza now. Scrambling up out of the water, skid- 
ding on the tiles, Duane Marvy, bringing up the rear, 
emerges into an ice-cold changing-room to find the last 
of the bathers fled, the closets stone-empty except for one 
multicolored velvet something or other. “Hey where’s my 
uniform!” stomping on the floor, fists at his sides, face very 
red. “Oh you motherless bastards,” thereupon throwing 
several bottles and ashtrays, breaking two windows, attack- 
ing the wall with an ornate umbrella stand, feeling better 
for it in his mind. He hears combat boots crashing over- 
head and in rooms nearby, girls screaming, a phonograph 
record knocked screeching into silence. 

He checks out this plush or velvet rig, finds it to be a 
pig costume complete with mask, considers slyly that no 
MP would bother an innocent funseeking pig. As humor- 
less limey voices move closer through the rooms of Putzi’s, 
he rips frantically at silk lining and straw padding to make 
room for his own fat. And, struggled at last inside, whew, 
zipped up, mask hiding face, safe, clownish-anonymous, 
pushes out through bead curtains, then upstairs to the bar, 
only to run spang into a full division of the red-hatted 
*suckers coming his way, all in step, swear to God. 

“Here’s our elusive swine, gentlemen,” pocked face, 
blunt and ragged mustache, pointing a pistol right at his 
head, others moving up quickly, A civilian comes pushing 
through, spade-shape blazing dark on his smooth cheek. 

“Right. Dr. Muffage is outside with the ambulance, and 

we'd like two of your chaps for a moment, sergeant, till 
we're all secure.” 


708 Graviry’s RaAInsow 


“Certainly, sir.” Wrists weak from steam and comfort 
gathered skillfully behind his back before he can even get 
mad enough to start yelling at them—cold steel, ratcheting 
like a phone number being dialed late at night, with no 
hope in hell of any answer ever. ... 

~“Goddamn,” he finally gets out, mask mufflng his voice, 
giving it an echo that hurts his ears, “what’n thee hell’s 
wrong with you, boy? Don’t you know who I am?” 

But oh-oh, waitaminute—if they’ve found the uniform, 
Marvy ID and cocaine in the same set of pockets, maybe 
it isn’t such a hot idea to tell them his name just yet. . 

“Leftenant Slothrop, we presume. Come along, now.” 

He keeps silent. Slothrop, O.K., we'll just wait, see what 
the score is, square the dope thing later, play dumb, say 
it must’ve been planted. Maybe even find him a Jewish 
lawyer good enough to nail the ’suckers for false arrest. 

He’s escorted out the door and into the idling ambulance. 
The bearded driver gives him only a quick over-the- 
shoulder glance, then lets in the clutch. Before he can think 
to struggle, the other civilian and the MPs have quickly 
strapped Marvy at knees and chest to a stretcher. 

A pause by an Army lorry to let the MPs off again. Then 
they continue on. Toward Cuxhaven. Marvy thinks. Noth- 
ing but night, moon-softened blackness out the window. 
Can’t tell. ... 

“Sedation now?” Ace of Spades crouches beside him, 
shining a pocket flashlight over ampoules in his kit, rattling 
syringes and points. 

“Mm. Yes, we're almost there.” 

“I don’t see why they couldn’t have age us hospital 
space for this.” 

The driver laughs. “Oh yes, I can just see that.” 

Filling the hypodermic slowly, “Well we are under 
orders ... I mean there’s nothing—” 

“Dear chap, it’s not the most respectable operation.” 

“Hey,” Major Marvy tries to raise his igs “Operation? 
What’s this, boy?” : 
“Ssh,” ripping away part of one pigsuit! sleeve, =a 

Marvy’s arm. 

“I don’t want no needle—” but it’s already in the vein — 
and discharging as the other man seeks to calm him. ay i 
mean you really got the wrong fella, you know?” 4 


Inthe Zone’ 709 


“Of course, Leftenant.” 

“Hey, hey, hey. No. Not me, I’m a major: ” He should be 
more emphatic about this, more convincing. Maybe it’s the 
*sucking pig mask in the way. Only he can hear his voice, 
now given back entirely to himself, flatter, metallic... 
they can’t hear him. “Major Duane Marvy.” They don’t 
believe him, don’t believe his name: Not even his name. ... 
Panic strikes him, deeper than the sedative has reached, 
and he begins to buck truly in terror against the straps, 
feeling small muscles along his chest stretch into useless 
twinges of pain, oh God; beginning to scream now with all 
his might, no words, only cries, as loud as the strap across 
his chest will let him. 

“For pity’s. sake,” the driver sighs. “Can’t you shut him 
up, Spontoon?” 
_ Spontoon. has sided ripped the pig mask away, and 
teplaces it now with one of gauze, which he holds on with 
one hand while dripping ether with the other—whenever 
the thrashing head comes within range: “Pointsman has 
taken leave of his senses,” he feels obliged to say, irritated 
out of all patience, “Sf he calls this a ‘calm imperturbable. id 
2 “all right, we're onthe strand now. No one in sight.” 
Muffage drives down toward the water, the sand just solid 
enough to hold the ambulance, everything very white in 
the small moon, which is at its ‘zenith . . perfect ice. 
“Oh,” Marvy moans. “Oh fuck. Oh no. Oh Jesus,” the 
words in long drugged diminuendo, struggles against: his 
bonds weakening as Muffage parks them at last, an oliye- 
: derelict tiny on this broad beach, the enormous slick 


| 


ii ie away moonward, to the threshold of the north 


“Plenty of time,” Muffage lookttig at his watch. “We're 
catching the C-47 at one. They said they could hold up 
for a bit.” Sighs of comfort before turning to their task. 

“That man’s connections,” Spontoon shaking “his head, 
ving the instruments from their disinfectant solution 
oy laying them on a sterile cloth beside the stretcher. “My, 
vy. Let’s hope he never turns to a life of crime, eh?” 
“Fuck,” groans Major Marvy softly, “oh, fuck me, will 


| Both men have scrubbed, and donned masks and rubber 
ae Muffage has switched on a oe light which stares 


710 Gravity's Rainsow 


down, a soft radiant eye. The two work quickly, in silence, 
two wartime pros used to field expediency, with only an 
occasional word from the patient, a whisper, a white 
pathetic grope in his ether-darkness after the receding 
point of light that’s all he has left of himself. 

It’s a simple procedure. The crotch of the velvet costume 
is tom away. Muffage decides to dispense with shaving 
the scrotum. He douses it first with iodine, thew squeezes 
in turn each testicle against the red-veined and hairy bag, 
makes the incision quickly and cleanly through skin and 
surrounding membranes, popping the testicle itself out 
through the wound and welling blood, pulling it out with 
the left hand till the cords hard and soft are strung visible 
under the light. As if they are musical strings he might, a 
trifle moon-mad, strum here on the empty beach into ap- 
propriate music, his hand hesitates: but then, reluctantly 
bowing to duty, he severs them at the proper distances 
from the slippery stone, each incision then being bathed 
in disinfectant, and the two neat slits, side by side, finally 
sutured up again. The testicles are plopped into a bottle of 
alcohol. 

“Souvenirs for Pointsman,” Muffage sighs, stripping off 
the surgical gloves. “Give that one another shot. It might 
be better if he sleeps through, and someone back in London 
explains this to him.” 

Muffage starts up the motor, backs in a half-circle and 
slowly heads back up toward the road, the vast sea lying 
still behind, : 

Back at Putzi’s, Slothrop curls in a wide crisp-sheeted 
bed beside Solange, asleep and dreaming about Zwolf-— 
kinder, and Bianca smiling, he and she riding on the wheel, — 
their compartment become a room, one he’s never seen, a | 
room in a great complex of apartments big as a city, whose 
corridors can be driven or bicycled along like streets: trees 
lining them, and birds singing in the trees. . 4 

And “Solange,” oddly enough, is dreaming of Bianca 
too, though under a different aspect: it’s of| her own child, 
Ilse, riding lost through the Zone on a long freight tr 
that never seems to come to rest. She isn’t unhappy, nor is 
she searching, exactly, for her father. But Leni’s early 
dream for her is coming true. She will not be used. There 
is change, and departure: but there is also help when 
looked for from the strangers of the day, and hiding, out 


In the Zone 711 


among the accidents of this drifting Humility, never quite 
to be extinguished, a few small chances for mercy... . 
Upstairs, one Mdéllner, valise full of his night’s treasures 
—an American major’s uniform and papers, and 244 ounces 
of cocaine—explains to the shaggy American sailor that 
Herr von Goll is a very busy man, attending to business in 
the north, as far as he knows, and has not commissioned 
him to bring to Cuxhaven any kind of papers, no military 
discharges, passports—nothing. He’s sorry. Perhaps the 
sailor’s friend is mistaken. Perhaps, again, it’s only a tem- 
porary delay. One appreciates that forgeries take time. 
Bodine watches him leave, unaware of what’s inside that 
valise. Albert Krypton has drunken himself unconscious. 
Shirley comes wandering in, bright-eyed and restless, wear- 
ing a black garter belt and stockings. “Hmm,” she sez, wi 
a certain look. 
“Hmm,” sez Seaman Bodine. 
“And anyway, it was only ten cents at the Battle of the 
Bulge.” 


oO 


So: he has traced Weissmann’s battery from Holland, across 
the salt marshes and lupine and bones of cows, to find this. 
Lucky he’s not superstitious. He’d be taking it for a pro- 
phetic vision. There is of course a perfectly rational ex- 
planation, but Tchitcherine has never read Martin Fierro. 

He watches from his temporary command post in a copse 
of jumpers on a low hill. Through the binoculars he sees 
two men, one white, one black, holding guitars. Towns- 
people are gathered in a circle, but these Tchitcherine can 
crop out, leaving in his elliptical field a scene with the 
same structure as the male-female singing contest in the 
middle of a flat grassland in Central Asia well over a 
decade ago—a coming-together of opposites that signaled 
then his own approach to the Kirghiz Light. What does it 
signal this time? 

Over his head, the sky is streaked and hard as marble. 
He knows. Weissmann installed the S-Gerat and fired the 
00000 somewhere close by. Enzian can’t be far behind. It 
will be here. 

But he has to wait. Once that would have been un- 


712 Gravity's Rainsow 


bearable. But since Major Marvy dropped out of sight, 
Tchitcherine has been a little more cautious. Marvy was.a 
key man. There is a counterforce in the Zone. Who was 
the Soviet intelligence man who showed up just before the 
fiasco in the clearing? Who tipped the Schwarzkommando 
off to the raid? Who got rid of Marvy? 
' He’s been trying hard not to believe too much in the 
Rocket-cartel. Since his illumination that night, Marvy 
drunk, Bloody Chiclitz declaiming on the virtues of Herbert 
Hoover, Tchitcherine has been watching for evidence. 
Gerhardt von Géll, with his corporate octopus wrapping 
every last negotiable item in the Zone, must be in it, con- 
sciously or otherwise. Tchitcherine last week was on the 
point of flying back to Moscow. He’d seen Mravenko, one 
of the VIAM people, briefly in Berlin. They met in the 
Tiergarten, two officers ostensibly strolling in the sun. 
Work crews shoveled cold patch into holes in the pave- 
ment, banging it flat with shovels. Bicycle riders ratcheted 
by, skeleton-functional as their machines. Small clusters 
of civilians and military were back under the trees, sitting 
on fallen trunks or lorry wheels, stirring through bags and 
valises, dealing. “You're in trouble,” Mravenko said. | 
He’d been a remittance man too, back in the thirties, 
and the most maniacal, systemless chess player in Central 
Asia. His tastes ran low enough to include even blindfold 
chess, which Russian sensibilities find unutterably gross. 
Tchitcherine sat down at the board each time more upset 
than the last, trying to be amiable, to jolly the madman > 
into some kind of rational play. Most often he’d lose. But 
it was either Mravenko or the Semirechie winter. 
“Do you have any idea what’s going on?” - 
Mravenko laughed. “Does anybody? Molotov isn’t telling” 
Vishinsky. But they know things about you. Remember 
the Kirghiz Light? Sure you do. Well, they found out about ; 
that. I didn’t tell them, but they got to somebody.” 
“It’s ancient history. Why bring it up nowP” 4 
“You're regarded as ‘useful,’ ” ny fora ng 


They looked at each other, then, for a long time. It wa 
a death sentence. Usefulness out here ends as quickly as 
a communiqué. Mravenko was afraid, and not entirely fe 
Tchitcherine, either. ) 

“What will you do, Mravenko?P” 


J 


In the Zone 713 
“Try not to be very useful. They’re not perfect, though.” 
- Both men knew this was meant to be comfort, and isn’t 
: working too well. “They don’t really know what makes 
you useful. They go on statistics. I don’t think you were 
| supposed to survive the War. When you did, they had to 
_ look at you more closely.” 
_. “Maybe I'll survive this, too.” And that was when he got 
_the idea of flying to Moscow. But just about then word 
came in that Weissmann’s battery couldn’t be traced any 
_ further than the Heath. And the renewed hope of meeting 
_ Enzian stopped him from going—the seductive hope that’s 
leading him further each day from any chance of continu- 
| ing on past the other side of that meeting. He never sup- 
posed he would. The real question is: will they get him 
before he gets EnzianP All he needs is a little more time 
| . - . his only hope is if they're looking for Enzian too, or 
| 


the S-Gerat, and using him the same way he thinks he’s 
) using Slothrop.... 

_. The horizon is still clear: has been all day. Cypress- 
| shaped junipers stand in the rust and hazy distances, still 
| as monuments, The first purple flowers are showing on the 
heather. It is not the busy peace of late summer, but the 
peace of a burial ground. Among the prehistoric German 
/ tribes, that’s what this country was: the territory of the 
+ dead. 

_. A dozen nationalities, dressed as Argentine estancieros, 

crowd around the soup-kitchen commissary. El Nato is 
' standing on the saddle of his horse, Gaucho style, looking 
‘off into the German pampas. Felipe is kneeling out in the 
jsun, making his noontime devotionals to the living pres- 
ence of a certain rock back in the wasteland of La Rioja, 
jon the eastern slopes of the Andes. According to an Ar- 
‘| gentine legend from the last century, Maria Antonia Correa 
‘followed her lover into that arid land, carrying their new- 
born child, Herders found her a week later, dead. But the 
‘infant had survived, by nursing from her corpse. Rocks 
near the site'of the miracle have since been the objects of 
yearly pilgrimages. But Felipe’s particular rock embodies 
‘also an intellectual system, for he believes (as do M. F. 
Beal and others) in a form of mineral consciousness not 
‘too much different from that of plants and animals, except 
for the time scale. Rock’s time scale is a lot more stretched 


714 Gravity's Ramnsow 


out. “We're talking frames per century,” Felipe like every- 
body else here lately has been using a bit of movie lan- 
guage, “per millennium!” Colossal. But Felipe has come 
to see, as those who are not Sentient Rocksters seldom do, 
that history as it’s been laid on the world is only a fraction, 
an outward-and-visible fraction. That we must also look to 
the untold, to the silence around us, to the passage of the 
next rock we notice—to its aeons of history under the long 
and female persistence of water and air (who'll be there, 
once or twice per century, to trip the shutter?), down to 
the lowland where your paths, human and mineral, are 
most likely to cross. ... 

Graciela Imago Portales, dark hair parted in the middle 
and drawn back from her forehead, wearing a long black 
riding skirt and black boots, sits shuffling cards, stacking 
herself flushes, full houses, four of a kind, just for her own 
amusement. The supernumeraries have brought next to 
nothing to play with. She knew it would come to this: 
she'd thought once that by using it only in games, money 
would lose its reality. Wither away. Has it, or is she play- 
ing a game with herself? It seems Beldustegui has been 


has its value, its probable success against other moments 
in other hands, and the shuffle for him is always moment- 
to-moment. He can’t afford to remember other permuta- 


he loses, hel go on to something else. 
back. She’s glad of that. He’s a source of : 
doesn’t know, if the moment came, how st she'd be. 
Often at night shell break through a membrane of 
alcohol and optimism to see really how much she needs” 
The sets for the movie-to-be help some. The buildings 


Hh; In the Zone 715 


are mares not a false front in sight, The boliche is stocked 
with real liquor, the pulperia with real food, The sheep, 
cattle, horses, and corrals are real, The huts are weather- 
proof "and are being slept in, When von Goll leaves—if he 
ever comes—nothing will be struck. Any of the extras who 
want to stay are ras. Many of them only want to rest 
up awhile for more DP trains, more fantasies of what home 
was like before the destruction, and some dream of getting 
somewhere, They'll move on. But will others come? And 
what will the military government think of a community 
like this in the middle of their garrison state? 

It isn’t the strangest village in the Zone, ponainone has 


over by army dow, Dobermans wt Shepherds, each one 
conditioned to on sight any human except the one who 
trained him, But the trainers are dead men now, or Jost. 
The dogs have Lge out in packs, ganged cows in the flelds 
and br carcasses miles overland, back to the 
pod ve broken into supply depots Rin-Tin-Tin 
style and looted K-rations, frozen hamburger, cartons of 
bars. Bodies of neighboring villagers and eager 

Pies litter all the roaches to the gang 
obody can get near it, expeditionary force came 
armed with rifles and grenades, but the dogs all scattered 
in the night, slender as wolves, and no one could bring 
himself to destroy the 8 Ayo No one wanted to 
occupy the village, either. So they went away, And the 
nla ed If there are lines of power among them- 
Pee hha alties, jealousies, no one knows. Someday 

in troops, But the dogs may not know of 

a ¢ no German anxleties about encirclement 
Be lv ently in th ight ofthe one manta 
Stranger, There may be no way of distin- 

sg okt the Me gee ens livet—~ 
hunger or thirst or sex. For all they know, kill-the- 


716 Gravity’s Rarnsow 


stranger was born in them. If any have remembered ‘the 
blows, the electric shocks, the rolled-up newspapers no one 
read, the boots and prods, their pain is knotted in now with 
the Stranger, the-hated. If there are heresiarchs among the 
dogs, they are careful about suggesting out loud any extra- 
canine source for these sudden eruptions of lust to kill that 
take them over, even the pensive heretics themselves, at 
any first scent of the Stranger. But in private they point to 
the remembered image of one human, who has visited only 
at intervals, but in whose presence they were tranquil and 
affectionate—from whom came nourishment, kind scratches 
and strokings, games of fetch-the-stick, Where is he now? 
Why is he different for some and not for others? 

There is a possibility, among the dogs, latent so far be- 
cause it’s never been seriously tested, of a crystallizing into 
sects, each around the image of ‘its trainer, A feasibility 
study, in fact, is going on even now at staff level in G-5, 
to see whether original trainers might not be located, and 
this crystallizing begun. One sect might try to protect its 
trainer against attacks from others. Given the right com- 
binations and an acceptable trainer-loss figure, it might 
be cheaper to let the dogs finish themselves off than to 
send in combat troops. The study has been contracted to, 
of all people, Mr. Pointsman, who is now restricted to one 
small office at Twelfth House, the rest of the space having 
been taken over by an agency studying options for national- 
izing coal and steel—given him more out of sympathy than 
anything else. Since the castrating of Major Marvy, Points 
man has been officially in disgrace. Clive Mossmoon and 
Sir Marcus Scammony sit in their club, among discarded 
back copies of British Plastics, drinking the knight’s fa- 
vorite, Quimporto—a weird prewar mixture of quinine, 
beef-tea and port—with a dash of Coca-Cola and a peeled 
onion. Ostensibly the meeting is to finalize plans for the 
Postwar Polyvinyl Chloride Raincoat, a source of great 
corporate fun these days (“Imagine the look on some poor 
bastard’s face when the whole sleeve simply falls out of 
the shoulder—” “O-or how about mixing in Something that — 
will actually dissolve in the rain?”). But Mossmoon really 
wants to discuss Pointsman: “What shall we do with 
PointsmanP” ; 

“I found the most darling boots in Portobello Road,” 


— 
| 


In the Zone FLT: 


pipes Sir Marcus, whom it’s always hard to get around to 
talking business. “They'll look stunning on you. Blood-red 
cordovan and halfway up your thighs. Your naked thighs.” 

“We'll give it a go,” replies Clive, neutral as can be 
(though it’s a thought, old Scorpia’s been so damned 
bitchy lately). “I could use a spot of relaxation after try- 
ing to explain Pointsman away to the Higher Levels.” 

“Oh, the dog chap. I say, have you ever thought about 
a Saint Bernard? Big, shaggy darlings.” 

“On occasion,” Clive keeps at it, “but mostly I think 
about' Pointsman.” 

. “Not your sort, darling. Not at all. And he is getting on, 
poor chap.” 

“Sir Marcus,” last resort, usually the willowy knight de- 
mands to be called Angelique, and there seems no other 
way to get his attention, “if this show prangs, we're going 
to see a national crisis. 've got Ginger Groupers jamming 
my switchboard and my mailbox day and night—” 

“Mm, Id like to jam your male box, Clivey—” 

“—and. 1922 Committee coming in the windows. 
Bracken and Beaverbrook go on, you know, it isn’t as if 
the election put them out of a job or something—” 

“Dear chap,” smiling angelically, “there isn’t going to 
be any crisis, Labour wants the American found as much 
as we do. We sent him out to destroy the blacks, and it’s 
obvious now he won’t do the job. What harm can he 
cause, roaming around Germany? For all we know he’s 
taken ship for South America and all those adorable little 
mustachios. Let it be for a while. We’ve got the Army, 
when the time. is right. Slothrop was a good try at a 
moderate solution, but in the end it’s always the Army, 
isn’t it?” 

“How can you be so sure the Americans will ever con- 
done that?” 

A long disagreeable giggle. “Clive, you’re such a little 
boy. You don’t know the Americans. I do. I deal with 

them. They'll want to see how we do with our lovely 
black animals—oh dear, ex Africa semper aliquid novi, 
‘they’re so big, so strong—before they try it on their own, 
ah, target groups. They may say a good many harsh 
things if we fail, but there'll be no sanctions.” 

“Ate we going to fail?” / 


718 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


“We're all going to fail,” Sir Marcus primping his curls, 
“but the Operation won’t.” 

Yes. Clive Mossmoon feels himself rising, as from a bog 
of trivial frustrations, political fears, money problems: de- 
livered onto the sober shore of the Operation, where all 
is firm underfoot, where the self is a petty indulgent ani- 
mal that once cried in its mired darkness. But here there is 
no whining, here inside the Operation. There is no lower 
self. The issues are too momentous for the lower self to 
interfere. Even in the chastisement room sat Sir Marcus’s 
estate, “The Birches,” the foreplay is a game about who 
has the real power, who’s had it all along, chained and 
corseted though he be, outside these shackled walls. The 
humiliations of pretty “Angelique” are calibrated against 
their degree of fantasy. No joy, no real surrender. Only 
the demands of the Operation. Each of us has his place, 
and the tenants come and go, but the places remain.... 

It wasn’t always so. In the trenches of the First World 
War, English men came to love one another decently, with- 
out shame or make-believe, under the easy likelihoods of 
their sudden deaths, and to find in the faces of other 
young men evidence of otherwordly visits, some poor hope 
that may have helped redeem even mud, shit, the decay- 


ing pieces of human meat... . It was the end of the world, 


it was total revolution (though not quite in the way Walter 
Rathenau had announced): every day thousands of the 
aristocracy new and old, still haloed in their ideas of right 
and wrong, went to the loud guillotine of Flanders, run 
day in and out, on and on, by no visible hands, certainly 
not those of the people—an English class was being 


decimated, the ones who'd volunteered were dying for — 
those who’d known something and hadn’t, and despite it — 
all, despite knowing, some of them, of the betrayal, while © 
Europe died meanly in its own wastes, men loved. But the 


life-cry of that love has long, since hissed away into no 
more than this idle and bitchy faggotry. In this latest War, 
death was no enemy, but a collaborator. Homosexuality in 
high places is just a camal afterthought now, and the real 
and only fucking is done on paper. ... 


“ 
% 
; 


a 


een ie 3 


R ey sai ‘et Si 


O 


ette Davis and Margaret Dumont are in the curly-Cuvil- 
és drawing-room of somebody’s palatial home. From out- 
de the window, at some point, comes the sound of a 
azoo, playing a tune of astounding tastelessness, probably 
Who Dat Man?” from A Day at the Races (in more 
rays than one). It is one of Groucho Marx’s vulgar friends. 
he sound is low, buzzing, and guttural. Bette Davis 
veezes, tosses her head, flicks her cigarette. “What,” she 
quires, “is that?” Margaret Dumont smiles, throws out 
er chest, looks down her nose. “Well it sounds,” she 
»plies, “like a kazoo.” 

For all Slothrop knows, it was a kazoo. By the time he’s 
wake, the racket has faded in the morning. Whatever it 
vas, it woke him up. What it was, or is, is Pirate Prentice, 
2 a more or less hijacked P-47, on route to Berlin. His 
rders are terse and clear, like those of the others, agents 
f the Pope, Pope got religion, go out ’n’ find that min- 
esinger, he’s a good guy after all. ... 

Well, it’s an older Jug, one with a greenhouse canopy. 
‘he barred field of sight gives Pirate twinges of memory 
1 his neck muscles. The plane seems permanently out of 
rim to him, though he still fiddles now and then with 
ifferent tabs. Right now he’s trying the War Emergency 
‘ower to see how it works, even though there seems to be 
o War, no Emergency, keeping an eye on the panel, 
yhere RPMs, manifold pressure, and cylinder-head tem- 
erature are all nudging their red lines. He eases it down 
nd flies on, and presently is trying a slow roll over Celle, 
hen a loop over Brunswick, then, what the hell, an Immel- 
aann over Magdeburg. On his back, molars aching in a 
rin, he starts his roll a hair too slow, just this side of 
ne-thirty, and nearly stalls it, jolts over a set of surprise 
oints—finish it as an ordinary loop or go for the Immel- 
nann?—already reaching for. ailerons, forget the damn 
udder, a spin isn’t worth worrying about... but at the 
ast second does give the pedal just a ‘touch anyway, a 
ainor compromise (I’m nearly forty, good God, is it hap- 
ening to me too?) and rolls himself upright again. It had 
0 be the Immelmann. 


721 


722 Graviry’s Rainsow, 


Oh I’m the Eagle of Tooting, 

Bombing and shooting, 

And nobodee can bring me down! 

Old Kaiser Bill, you’re over the hill, 

Cause I’m comin’ into your home town! 

Tell all the frauleins and mademoiselles 

To keep a light in the window forme... 

Cause I’m the Eagle of Tooting, just rooty-toot-tooting. 
And flyin’ on to victo-ree] 


By now, Osbie Feel ought to be in Marseilles, already 
trying to contact Blodgett Waxwing. Webley Silvernail is 
on route to Ziirich. Katje will be going to Nordhausen... 
Katje.... 

No, no, she hasn’t told him everything she’s been up to. 
It’s none of his business. However much she told him, 
there’d always be the bit of mystery to her. Because of 
what he is, because of directions he can’t move in. But 
how is it both of them kept from vanishing from each 
other, into the paper cities and afternoons of this strange 
peace, and the coming Austerity? Could it be there’s some- 
thing about ad hoc arrangements, like the present mission, 
that must bring you in touch with the people you need to 
be with? that more formal adventures tend, by their na- 
ture, to separation, to loneliness? Ah, Prentice. ... What's 
this, a runaway prop? no, no, check the fuel-pressure— 
here’s the gauge needle wobbling, rather low, tank’s run 


Little in-flight annoyance for Pirate here, nothing seri- 
ous.... Out of his earphones now and then, ghost-voices . 
will challenge or reprimand him: air traffic people down in 
their own kingdom, one more overlay on the Zone, an- 
tennas strung in the wilderness like redoubts, radiating 
half-spheres of influence, defining invisible corridors-in-the- 
sky that are real only for them. The Thunderbolt is painted 
Kelly green. Hard to miss. Pirate’s idea. Gray was for the 
War. Let them chase. Catch me if you can. 

Gray was for the War. So, it seems, was Pirate’s odd 
talent for living the fantasies of others. Since V-E Day, 
nothing. But it’s not the end of his psychic difficulties. He 
is still being “haunted,” in the same marginal and uncer- 
tain way, by Katje’s ancestor Frans van der Groovy, dodo 
killer and soldier of fortune. The man never quite arrives, 
nor quite leaves. Pirate is taking it personally. He is the 


The Counterforce 723 


Dutchman’s compatible host, despite himself. What does 
Frans see in him? Has it to do—of course it does—with 
the Firm? 

He has warped a skein of his dreams into Pirate’s own, 
heretical dreams, exegeses of windmills that turned in 
shadow at the edges of dark fields, each arm pointing at 
a spot on the rim of a giant wheel that turned through the 
sky, stop and go, always exactly with the spinning cross: 

wind” was a middle term, a convention to express what 
really moved the. cross...and this applied to all wind, 
everywhere on Earth, shrieking between the confectionery 
pink and yellow mountains of Mauritius or stirring the 
tulips at home, red cups in the rain filling bead by clear 
bead with water, each wind had its own cross-in-motion, 
materially there or implied, each cross a unique mandala, 
bringing opposites together in the spin (and tell me now, 
Frans, what’s this wind I’m in, this 25,o00-foot wind? 
What mill’s that, grinding there below? What does. it 
grind, Frans, who tends the stone?). 

Far beneath the belly of the Thunderbolt, brushed on 
the green countryside, pass the time-softened outlines of 
ancient earthworks, villages abandoned during the Great 
Dying, fields behind cottages whose dwellers were scythed 
down without mercy by the northward march of black 
plague. Behind a scrim, cold as sheets over furniture in a 
forbidden wing of the house, a soprano voice sings notes 
that never arrange themselves into a melody, that fall apart 
in the same way as dead proteins. . . 

“It’s as clear as the air,” rants Gustav the composer, “if 
you weren’t an old fool you’d see it—I know, I know, 
there’s an Old Fools’ Benevolent Association, you all know 
each other, you vote censures against the most trouble- 
some under-7os and my name’s at the head of the list. Do 
you think I ‘care? You're all'on a different frequency. 
There’s no way you'll get interference from us. We’re too 
far separated. We have our own problems.” 

Cryptozoa of many kinds scurry through crumbs, pubic 
_ hairs, wine-splashes, tobacco ash and shreds, a litter of 
_ dram cocaine vials, each with a red Bakelite top bearing 
_ the seal of Merck of Darmstadt. The bugs’ atmosphere 
ends about an inch from the floor, an ideal humidity, dark- 
ness, stability of temperature. Nobody bothers them. 


724 Gravity's Rainsow 


There is an unspoken agreement about not stomping on 
bugs in Saure’s place. 

“You're caught in tonality,” screams Gustav. “Trapped. 
Tonality is a game. All of them are. You're too old. You'll 
never move beyond the game, to the Row. The Row is 
enlightenment.” 

“The Row is a game too.” Saure sits grinning with an 
ivory spoon, shoveling incredible piles of cocaine into his 
nose, going through his whole repertoire: arm straight 
out swinging in a giant curve zoom precisely to the nostril 
he’s aiming at, then flicking in the lot from two feet away 
without losing a crystal .. . then a whole bunch gets tossed 
up in the air like a piece of popcorn and nose-gobbled 
ngkok on target, inside where it’s smooth as a Jo block, 
not a cilium in sight there since the Liebknecht funeral, 
if not before . . . hand-to-hand shifts of spoon two or three 
times, faster than ivory ever moved in air... rails disap- 
pearing in a wink without benefit of a tube to guide them. 
“Sound is a game, if you're capable of moving that far, 
you adenoidal closet-visionary. That’s why I listen to 
Spohr, Rossini, Spontini, ’'m choosing my game, one full 
of light and kindness. You're stuck with that stratosphere 
stuff and rationalize its dullness away by calling it ‘en- 
lightenment.’ You don’t what what enlightenment is, Kerl, 
you're blinder than I am.” 

Slothrop moseys down the trail to a mountain stream 
where he’s left his harp to soak all night, wedged between 
a couple of rocks in a quiet pool. 

“Your ‘light and kindness’ are the jigging of the doomed,” 
sez Gustav. “You can smell mortality in every one of those 
bouncy little tunes.” Surly, he decapitates a vial of cocaine 
with his teeth, and spits the red debris in among the shim- 
mering bugs. : y 

Through the flowing water, the holes of the old Hohner 
Slothrop found are warped one by one, squares being bent 
like notes, a visual blues being played by “0 clear stream. 
There are harpmen and dulcimer players in all the rivers, 
wherever water moves. Like that Rilke prophesied, 


And though Earthliness forget you, 
To the stilled Earth say: I flow. 
To the rushing water speak; I am. 


The Counterforce. 725 


It is still possible, even this far out of it, to find and 
make audible the spirits of lost harpmen. Whacking the 
water out of his harmonica, reeds singing against his leg, 
picking up the single blues at bar 1 of this morning’s seg- 
ment, Slothrop, just suckin’ on his harp, is closer to being a 
spiritual medium than he’s been yet, and he doesn’t even 
know it... 

The harp didn’t show up right away. His first days in 
these mountains, he came across a set of bagpipes, left 
behind in April by some Highland unit. Slothrop has a 
knack for doping things out. The Imperial instrument was 
a cinch. In a week he mastered that dreamy tune Dick 
Powell sang in the movies, “In the Shadows Let Me Come 


_ and Sing to You,” and spent most of his time playing that, 


WHANGdediddle de-dee, WHANG de dum—de-doooooo 

.. over and over, on the bagpipes. By and by he began 
to notice that offerings of food were being left near the 
lean-to he’d put up. Mangel-wurzels, a basket of cherries, 
even fresh fish. He never saw who was leaving them. 
Either he was supposed to be a bagpiper’s ghost, or just 
purely sound itself, and he knew enough about solitudes 
and night-voices to figure what was going on. He quit 
playing the bagpipes, and next day he found the harp. It 
happens to be the same one he lost in 1938 or -9 down 
the toilet at the Roseland Ballroom, but that’s too long ago 
for him to remember. 

He’s kept alone. If others have seen him or his fire, they 
haven't tried to approach. He’s letting hair and beard 
grow, wearing a dungaree shirt and trousers Bodine liber- 
ated for him from the laundry of the John E. Badass. 
But he likes to spend whole days naked, ants crawling up 
his legs, butterflies lighting on his shoulders, watching the 
life on the mountain, getting to know shrikes and caper- 
caillie, badgers and marmots. Any number of directions 
he ought to be moving in, but he’d rather stay right here 
for now. Everyplace he’s been, Cuxhaven, Berlin, Nice, 
Ziirich, must be watched now. He could still make a try 
at finding Springer, or Blodgett Waxwing. Why does he. 
have this obsession with getting papersP What th’ fuck 
are papers, anyhow? He could try one of the Baltic ports, 
wait around for Frau Gnahb to put in, and get over to 
that Denmark or that Sweden. DPs, offices burned, records 


. 


726 Gravity's RAINBOW 


lost forever—papers might not mean so much in Europe 
... waitaminute, so much as where, Slothrup? Huh? Amer- 
ica? Shit. Cmon— 

Yup, still thinking there’s a way to get back. He’s been 
changing, sure, changing, plucking all the albatross of 
self now and then, idly, half-conscious as picking his nose 
—but the one ghost-feather his fingers always brush by is 
America. Poor asshole, he can’t let her go. She’s whispered 
love me too often to him in his sleep, vamped insatiably 
his waking attention with come-hitherings, incredible prom- 
ises. One day—he can see a day—he might be able finally 
to say sorry, sure and leave her... but not just yet. One 
more try, one more chance, one more deal, one more 
transfer to a hopeful line. Maybe it’s just pride. What if 
there’s no place for him in her stable any more? If she has 
turned him out, shell never explain. Her “stallions” have 
no rights. She is immune to their small, stupid questions. 
She is exactly the Amazon Bitch your fantasies have called 
her to be. 

Then there’s Jamf, the coupling of “Jam” and “I” in the 
primal dream. Who can he go to with if? it will not bear 
that much looking into, will it? If he gets too close, there 
will be revenge. They might warn him first, They might 
not. 

Omens grow clearer, more specific. He watches flights of 
birds and patterns in the ashes of his fire, he reads the 
guts of trout he’s caught and cleaned, scraps of lost paper, 
graffiti on the broken walls where facing has been shot 
away to reveal the brick nda in specific 
shapes that may also be read. . 

One night, on the wall of a " public shithouse stinking 
and ripe with typhoid, he finds among initials, dates, hasty 
pictures of penises and mouths open to receive them, 
Werewolf stencils of the dark man with the high shoulders 
and the Homburg hat, an official slogan: wmusT pu V-2; 
DANN ARBEITE. If you want the V-2, then work. Good Eve- 
ning Tyrone Slothrop...no, no, wait, it’s;O.K., over on 
the other wall they’ve also painted wiusr pu V-4, DANN 
ARBEITE. Lucky. The brimming voices recede, the joke 
clarifies, he is only back with Goebbels the man’s in- 
- ability to let a good thing be. But it had taken an effort 
_to walk around and look at that other wall. Anything 


i The C ounterforce 727 


could’ve been back there. ‘It was dusk. Plowed fields, 

- power lines, ditches and distant windbreaks went for miles. 
He felt brave and in control. But then another message 
caught his eye: 


ROCKETMAN Was HERE 


His first thought was that he’d written it himself and 
forgot. Odd that that should’ve been his first thought, but 
it was. Might be he was starting to implicate himself, 
some yesterday version of himself, in the Combination 
against who he was right then. In its sluggish coma, the 
albatross stirred. 

Past Slothrops, say averaging one a day, ten thousand 
of them, some more powerful than others, had been going 
over every sundown to the furious host. They were the 

_ fifth-columnists, well inside his head, waiting the moment 
to deliver him to the four other divisions outside, closing 
gel i 

So, next to the other graffiti, with a piece of rock, he 

scratches this sign: 


Slothrop besieged. Only after he’d left it half a dozen 
more places did it dawn on him that what he was really 
drawing was the A4 rocket, seen from below. By which 
time he had become tuned to other fourfold expressions— 
variations on Frans van der Groov’s cosmic windmill— 
swastikas, gymnastic symbols FFFF in a circle symmetri- 
cally upside down and backward, Frisch Fromm Frohlich 
Frei over neat doorways in quiet streets, and crossroads, 
where you can sit and listen in to traffic from the Other 
Side, hearing about the future (no serial time over there: 
events are all there in the same eternal moment and so 
certain messages don’t always “make sense” back here: 
they lack historical structure, they sound fanciful, or 
insane). 

_ The sand-colored churchtops rear up on Slothrop’s hori- 
zons, apses out to four sides like rocket fins guiding the 


ae 
9 


728 Gravity's RAINBOW | 
streamlined spires ...chiseled in the sandstone he finds 


waiting the mark of consecration, a cross in a circle. At 
last, lying one afternoon spread-eagled at his ease in the 
sun, at the edge of one of the ancient Plague towns he 
becomes a cross himself, a crossroads, a living intersection 
where the judges have come to set up a gibbet for a 
common criminal who is to be hanged at noon. Black 
hounds and fanged little hunters slick as weasels, dogs 
whose breeds have been lost for 700 years, chase a female 
in heat as the spectators gather, it’s the fourth hanging 
this spring and not much spectacle here except that this 
one, dreaming at the last instant of who can say what 
lifted smock, what fat-haunched gnadige Frau Death may 
have come sashaying in as, gets an erection, a tre- 
mendous darkpurple swelling, and just as his neck breaks, 
he actually comes in his ragged loin-wrapping creamy as 
the skin of a saint under the purple cloak of Lent, and 
one drop of sperm succeeds in rolling, dripping hair to 
hair down the dead leg, all the way down, off the edge of 
the crusted bare foot, drips to earth at the exact center 
of the crossroad where, in the workings of the night, it 
changes into a mandrake root. Next Friday, at dawn, the 
Magician, his own moving Heiligenschein rippling infrared 
to ultraviolet in spectral rings around his shadow over the 
dewy grass, comes with his dog, a coal-black dog who hasn’t 
been fed for a few days. The Magician digs carefully all 
around the precious root till it’s held only by the finest 
root-hairs—ties it to the tail of his black dog, stops his 
own ears with wax then comes out with a piece of bread 
to lure the unfed dog rrrowf! dog lunges for bread, root is 
torn up and lets loose its piercing and fatal scream. The 
dog drops dead before he’s halfway to breakfast, his holy- 
light freezes and fades in the million dewdrops. Magician 
takes the root tenderly home, dresses -it in a little white 
outfit and leaves money with it overnight: in the morning 
the cash has multiplied tenfold. A delegate from the Com- 
mittee on Idiopathic Archetypes comes to visit. “Inflation?” 
the Magician tries to cover. up with some flowing hand- 
moves. “ ‘Capital’? Never heard of that.” “No, no,” replies 
the visitor, “not at the moment. Were trying to think 
ahead. We’d like very much to hear about the basic struc- 
ture of this. How bad was the scream for instance?” “Had 


The Counterforce | 729 


‘mrears plugged up, couldn’t hear it.” The delegate flashes a 


fraternal business smile. “Can’t say as I blame you.... 
Crosses, swastikas, Zone-mandalas, how can they not 
speak to Slothrop? He’s sat in Saure Bummer’s kitchen, the 
air streaming with kif moirés, reading soup recipes and 
finding in every bone and cabbage leaf paraphrases of 


himself ...news flashes, names of wheelhorses that will 


pay him off for a certain getaway.... He used to pick and 
shovel at the spring roads of Berkshire, April afternoons 


he’s lost, “Chapter 81 work,” they called it, following the 


scraper that clears the winter's crystal attack-from-within, 
its white necropolizing ... picking up rusted beer cans, 
rubbers yellow with preterite seed, Kleenex wadded to 
brain shapes hiding preterite snot, preterite tears, news- 
papers, broken glass, pieces of automobile, days when in 
superstition and fright he could make it all fit, seeing 
clearly in each an entry in a record, a history: his own, 
his winter’s, his country’s... instructing him, dunce and 
drifter, in ways deeper than he can explain, have been 
faces of children out the train windows, two bars of dance. 
music somewhere, in some other street at night, needles 
and branches of a pine tree shaken clear and luminous 
against night clouds, one circuit diagram out of hundreds 
in a smudged yellowing sheaf, laughter out of a cornfield 
in the early morning as he was walking to school, the 
idling of a motorcycle at one dusk-heavy hour of the sum- 
mer... and now, in the Zone, later in the day he became 
a crossroad, after a heavy rain he doesn’t recall, Slothrop 
sees a very thick rainbow here, a stout rainbow cock 
driven down out of pubic clouds into Earth, green wet 
valleyed Earth, and his chest fills and he stands crying, 


’ not a thing in his head, just feeling natural. ... 


O 


Double-declutchingly, heel-and-toe, away goes Roger 
Mexico. Down the summer Autobahn, expansion joints 
booming rhythmic under his wheels, he highballs a pre- 
Hitler Horch 870B through the burnt-purple rolling of the 


- Liineburg Heath. Over the windscreen mild winds blow 


down on him, smelling of junipers. Heidschnucken sheep 


730 Gravity's RAINBOW 


out there rest as still as fallen clouds, The bogs and broom 
go speeding by. Overhead the sky is busy, streaming, a 
living plasma. 

The Horch, army-green with one discreet daffodil 
painted halfway up its bonnet, was lurking inside a lorry 
at the Elbeward edge of the Brigade pool at Hamburg, 
shadowed except for its headlamps, stalked eyes of a 
friendly alien smiling at Roger. Welcome there, Earthman. 
Once under way, he discovered the floor strewn with roll- 
ing unlabeled glass jars of what seems to be baby food, 
weird unhealthy-colored: stuff no human baby could pos- 
sibly eat and survive, green marbled with pink, vomit- 
beige with magenta inclusions, all impossible to identify, 
each cap adorneed with a smiling, fat, cherubic baby, 
seething under the bright glass with horrible botulism . 
toxins ‘n’ ptomaines...now and then a new jar will be 
produced, spontaneously, under the seat, and roll out, 
against all laws of acceleration, among the pedals for his 
feet to get confused by. He knows he ought to look back 
underneath there to find out what’s going on, but can’t 
quite bring himself to. 

Bottles roll clanking on the floor, under the bonnet a 
hung-up tappet or two chatters its story of discomfort. 
Wild mustard whips past down the center of the Auto- 
bahn, perfectly two-tone, just yellow and green, a fateful 
river seen only by the two kinds of rippling light. Roger 
sings to a girl in Cuxhaven who still carries Jessica’s name: 


I dream that I have found us both again, 
With spring so many strangers’ lives away, 
And we, so free, 

Out walking by the sea, ; 

With someone else’s paper words to say... 


They took us at the gates of green return, 

Too lost by then to stop, and ask them why— 
Do children meet again? 

Does any trace remain, 

Along the superhighways of July? | 


; | | 
Driving now suddenly into such a bright gold bearding of 
slope and field that he nearly forgets to steer around the 
banked curve.... . aie 


- The Counterforce 731 


A week before she left, she came out to “The White 
Visitation” for the last time. Except for the negligible 
rump of PISCES, the place was a loony bin again. The 
barrage-balloon cables lay rusting across the sodden mead- 
ows, going to flakes, to ions and earth—tendons that sang 
in the violent nights, among the sirens wailing in thirds 
smooth as distant wind, among the drumbeats of bombs, 
now lying slack, old, in hard twists of metal ash. Forget- 
me-nots boil everywhere underfoot, and ants crowd, bus- 
tlng with a sense of kingdom. Commas, brimstones, 
painted ladies coast on the thermoclines along the cliffs. 
Jessica has cut fringes since Roger saw her last, and is 
going through the usual anxiety—“It looks utterly hor- 
rible, you don’t have to say it... .” 

“It’s utterly swoony,” sez Roger, “I love it.” 

“You're making fun.”. 
site why are we talking about haircuts for God's 
sake 

While somewhere, out beyond the Channel, a barrier 
difficult as the wall of Death to a novice medium, Leften- 
ant Slothrop, corrupted, given up on, creeps over the face 
of the Zone. Roger doesn’t want to give him up: Roger 
wants to do what's right. “I just can’t leave the poor twit 
out there, can I? They’re trying to destroy him—” 

But, “Roger,” she’d smile, “it’s spring. We're at peace.” 

No, we’re not. It’s another bit of propaganda. Something 
the P.W.E. planted. Now gentlemen as you've seen from 
the studies our optimum time is 8 May, just before the 
traditional Whitsun exodus, schools letting out, weather 
projections for an excellent growing season, coal require- 
ments beginning their seasonal decline, giving us a few 
months’ grace to get our Ruhr interests back on their feet— 
no, he sees only the same flows. of power, the same 
impoverishments he’s been thrashing around in since "39. 
His girl is about to. be taken away to Germany, when she 
ought to be demobbed like everyone else. No channel up- 
ward’ that will show either of them any hope of escape. 
There’s something still on, don’t call it a “war” if it makes 
you nervous, maybe the-death rate’s gone down a point or 
two, beer in cans is back at last and there were a lot of 
people in Trafalgar Square one night no so long ago... 
but Their enterprise goes on. 


732 Gravity's RAInBow 


The sad fact, lacerating his heart, laying open his empti- 
ness, is that Jessica believes Them. “The War” was the 
* condition she needed for being with Roger. “Peace” allows 
her to leave him. His resources, next to Theirs, are too 
meager. He has no words, no technically splendid em- 
brace, no aa fit that can ever hold her. Old Beaver, 
not surprisingly, will be doing air-defense liaison over 
there, so they'll be together in romantic Cuxhaven. Ta-ta 
mad Roger, it’s been grand, a wartime fling, when we came 
it was utterly incendiary, your arms open wide as a 
Fortress’s wings, we had our military secrets, we fooled 
the fat old colonels right and left but stand-down time 
must come to all, yikes! I must run sweet Roger really it’s 
been dreamy.... 

He would fall at her knees smelling of glycerine and 
rose-water, he would lick sand and salt from her ATS 
brogans, offer her his freedom, his next 50 years’ pay from 
a good steady job, his poor throbbing brain. But it’s too 
late. We're at Peace. The paranoia, the danger, the tune- 
less whistling of busy Death next door, are all put to 
sleep, back in the War, back with her Roger Mexico 
Years. The day the rockets stopped falling, it began to end 
for Roger and Jessica. As it grew clear, day after safe day, 
that no more would fall ever again, the new world crept 
into and over her like spring—not so much the changes 
she felt in air and light, in the crowds at Woolworth’s, as 
a bad cinema spring, full of paper leaves and cotton-wool 
blossoms and phony lighting...no, never again will she 
stand at their kitchen sink with a china cup squeaking in 
her fingers, its small crying-child sound defenseless, meekly 
resonating BLOWN OUT OF ATTENTION AS THE 
' ROCKET FELL emg: to a clatter of points white and 
blue across the floor. . 

Those death-rockets-1 now are in the past. This time she'll 
be on the firing end, she and Jeremy—isn’t that how it 
was always meant to be? firing them out to sea: no death, 
only the spectacle, fire and roar, the excitement without 
the killing, isn’t that what she prayed for? back in the 
fading house, derequisitioned now, occupied again by | 
human extensions of ball-fringe, dog pictures, Victorian 
chairs, secret piles of News of the World in the upstairs 
closet. 


The Counterforce 733 


She’s meant to go. The orders come from higher than 
she can reach. Her future is with the World’s own, and 
Roger's only with this strange version of the War he still 
carries with him. He can’t move, poor dear, it won't let 
him go. Still passive as he'd been under the rockets. 
Roger the victim. Jeremy the firer. “The War's my mother,” 
he said the first day, and Jessica has wondered what ladies 
in black appeared in his dreams, what ash-white smiles, 
what shears to.come snapping through the room, through 
their winter ...so much of him she never: got to know 
...so much unfit for Peace. Already she’s beginning to 
think of their time as a chain of explosions, craziness 
ganged to the rhythms of the War. Now he wants to go 
rescue Slothrop, another rocket-creature, a vampire whose 
sex life actually fed on the terror of that Rocket Blitz— 
ugh, creepy, creepy. They ought to lock him up, not set 

_him free. Roger must care more about Slothrop than about 

her, they're two of a kind, aren't they, well—she hopes 
they'll be happy together. They.can sit and drink beer, 
tell rocket stories, scribble equations for each other. How 
jolly. At least she won't be leaving him in a vacuum. He 
won't be lonely, hell have something to occupy the 
time. . 

She has wandered away from him, down the beach. The 
sun is so bright today that the shadows by her Achilles 
tendon are drawn sharp and black as seams up the heel 
of a silk stocking. Her head, as always, is bent forward, 
away, the bare nape he’s never stopped loving, will never 
see again, unprotected as her beauty, her innocence of 

- how forever in peril it moves through the World. She may 
know a little, may think of herself, face and body, as 
“pretty” <.. but he could never tell her all the rest, how 
many other living things, birds, nights smelling of grass 
and rain, sunlit moments of simple peace, also gather in 
what she is to him. Was. He is losing more than single 
Jessica: he’s losing a full range of life, of being for the 
first time at ease in the Creation. Going back to winter 
now, drawing back into his single envelope. The effort it 
5 to extend any further is more than he can make 

one. 

He hadn’t thought he’d cry when she left. But he cried. 
Snot by the cubic yard, eyes like red carnations. Presently, 


y 


734 Gravity's Rainsow 


every time his left foot hit the ground walking he'd get 
a jolt of pain through half his skull. Ah, this must be what 
they mean by the “pain of separation!” Pointsman kept 
showing up with armloads of work. Roger found himself 
unable to forget Jessica, and caring less about Slothrop. 

But one day Milton Gloaming popped in to deliver him 
from his unmoving. Gloaming was just back from a jaunt 
through the Zone. He’d found himself on a task force 
with one Josef Schleim, a defector of secondary brilliance, 
who had once worked for the IG out of Dr. Reithinger’s 
office, VOWI—the Statistical Department of NW7. There, 
Schleim had been assigned to the American desk, gather- 
ing for the IG economic intelligence, through subsidiaries 
and licensees like Chemnyco, General Aniline and Film, 
Ansco, Winthrop. In ’36 he came to England to work for 
Imperial Chemicals, in a status that was never to be free 
from ambiguities. He’d heard of Slothrop, yes indeed... 
recalled him from the old days. When Lyle Bland went 
out on his last transmural journey, there’d been Green 
Reports flapping through the IG offices for weeks, Geheime 
Kommandosache, rumors coupling and uncoupling like 
coal-tar molecules under pressure, all to do with who was 
likely to take over the Slots surveillance, now. that 
Bland was gone. 

This was toward the besitiritied of the great struggle for 
the IG’s intelligence machinery. The economic department 
of the foreign office and the foreign department of the 
economic office were both after it. So were the military, 
in particular the Wehrwirtschaftstab, a section of the Gen- 
eral Staff that maintained OKW’s liaison with industry. 
The IG’s own liaison with OKW was handled by Ver- 
mittlungsstelle W, under Drs. Dieckmann and Gorr. The 
picture was further confused by the usual duplicate Nazi 
Party offices, Abwehr-Organizations, set up throughout 
German industry after 1933. The. Nazis’ watchdog over 
the IG was called “Abteilung A” and was set up in the 
same office building as—in fact, it appeared perfectly 
congruent with—the IG’s own Army liaison group, Ver- 
mittlungsstelle W. But Technology, alas, braid-crowned 
and gold-thighed maiden, always comes up for grabs like 
this. Most likely the bitching and bickering of Army vs. 
Party was what finally drove Schleim over the hill, more 


The Counterforce 735). 


than any moral feelings about Hitler. In any case, he re- 


members Slothrop surveillance being assigned to a newly 
created “Sparte IV” under Vermittlungsstelle W. Sparte I 
was handling nitrogen and gasoline, II dyes, chemicals, 
buna rubber, pharmaceuticals, III film and fibers. IV 
handled Slothrop and nothing else, except—Schleim had 
heard tell—one or two miscellaneous patents acquired 
through some dealings with IG Chemie in Switzerland. An 
analgesic whose name he couldn’t recall, and a new plastic, 
some name like Mipolam... “Polimex,” or something. ... 

“Sounds like that would’ve come under Sparte II,” was 
Gloaming’s only comment at the time. 

“A few directors were upset,” Schleim agreed. “Ter 
Meer was a Draufganger—he and Horlein both, go-ahead 


fellows. They might have got it back.” 


“Did the Party assign an Abwehr man to this Sparte 
Iv?” 
“They must have, but I don’t know if he was SD or SS. 


_ There were so many of them around. I can remember 


some sort of rather thin chap with thick eyeglasses coming 
out of the office there once or twice. But he wore civilian 
clothes. Couldn’t tell you his name.” 

Well now what’n the bloddy ‘ell. ... 

“Surveillance?” Roger is fidgeting heavily, with his hair, 
his necktie, ears, nose, knuckles, “IG Farben had Slothrop 
under surveillance? Before the War? What for, Gloaming.” 

“Odd, isn’t itP’ Cheerio boing out the door without 
another word, leaving Roger alone with a most disagree- 
able light beginning to grow, the leading edge of a revela- 
tion, blinding, crescent, at the periphery of his brain. IG 
Farben, eh? Mr. Pointsman has been chumming, almost 
exclusively these days, with upper echelon from ICI. ICI 
has cartel arrangements with Farben. The bastard. Why, 
he must have known about Slothrop all along. The Jamf 
business was only a front for...-well say what the hell 
is going on here? 

_ Halfway up to London (Pointsman has repossessed the 
Jaguar, so Roger’s on a motorcycle from the PISCES pool, 
which consists now only of the cycle and one Morris with 
virtually-no clutch) it occurs to him that Gloaming was 
sent around deliberately by Pointsman, as some obscure 
tactic in this Nayland Smith campaign he seems to be into 


\ 
736 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


(Pointsman owns a matched set of all the books in Sax 
Rohmer’s great Manichaean saga, and is apt these days to 
pop in at any time, usually while Roger is sleeping or 
trying to take a quiet, shit, and actually stand there, in 
front of the toilet, reading aloud a pertinent text). Nothing 
is beyond Pointsman, he’s worse than old Pudding was, no 
shame at all. He would use anyone—Gloaming, Katje 
Borgesius, Pirate Prentice, no one is (Jessica) exempt from 
his (Jessica? ) Machiavellian— 

Jessica. Oh. Yes ofcourseofcourse Mexico you fucking 
idiot ...no wonder the 137th gave him the runaround. 
No wonder her orders came from Too High. He had even, 
lamb frolicking about the spit, asked Pointsman to see 
what he could do, . .. Fool. Fool. 

He arrives at Twelfth House on Gallaho Mews in a 
_ homicidal state of mind. Bicycle thieves run down the 
back streets, old pros wheeling them three abreast at a 
good pace. Young men with natty mustaches preen in the 
windows. Children loot the dustbins. Courtyard corners 
are drifted with official papers, the shed skin of a Beast at 
large. A tree has inexplicably withered in the street to 
a shingly black corpse. A fly lands belly-up on the front 
fender of Roger’s motorcycle, thrashes ten seconds, folds 
its veined and sensitive wings, and dies. Quick as that. 
First one Roger has ever seen. P-47s fly over in squadron 
box formations, four checkmarks apiece RedWhiteBlue- 
Yellow on the unamended. form of the whitish sky, squad- 
ron after squadron: it is either some military review, or 
another war. A plasterer is busy around the corner, smooth- 
ing over a bomb-scarred wall, plaster heaped on his hawk 
luscious as cream cheese, using an unfamiliar trowel in- 
herited from a dead friend, still, these first days, digging 
holes like an apprentice, the shiny knife-edge not yet 
broken to his hand, the curl of it a bit more than his own 
strength could have ever brought it to... Henry was a 
larger bloke....The fly, who was not sip unfolds its 
wings and zooms off to fool somebody else. 

All right Pointsman stomping into Twelth House, 
rattling the corkboards down the seven hallways and 
flights, receptionists making long arms fon |the tole 
dammit now where are you— 

- Not in his office. But Géza Rézsavélgyi is, and tries to 


The Counterforce 737 


give Roger a hard time. “You are ma-king a spec-tacle of 
your-self, young man.” 

“Shurrup you Transylvanian twit,” snarls Roger, “I'm 
looking for the boss, see, one funny move out of you and 
it’s your last taste of O-negative, Jackson, those fangs 
won't even be able to gum oatmeal when I’m through wiv 
you—” Alarmed Roézsavélgyi; retreating around the water 
cooler, tries to pick up a swivel chair to defend himself 
with. The seat falls off, and Rézsavélgyi is left with only 
the base, which happens, embarrassingly, to be shaped 
like a cross. 

“Where is he,” Mexican standoff, Roger gritting his 
teeth do not succumb to hysteria, it is a counter-produc- 
tive luxury you cannot, in your present great vulnerability, 
afford. ....“Come on you sod, tell me or you'll never see 
the inside of a coffin again—” 

In runs a short but spunky secretary, bit of a chubbette 
here, and commences belting Roger in the shins with the 
excess-profits tax records from 1940 to "44 of an English 
steel firm which happened to share a patent with Ver- 
einigte Stahlwerke for an alloy used in the liquid-oxygen 
couplings for the line running aft to the S-Gerat in A4 
number oooo0o. But Roger’s shins are not set up for this 
kind of information. The secretary’s glasses fall off. “Miss 
Miiller-Hochleben,” reading her nametag, “you look beastly 
without your glasses. Put ssem back on, at vuncel” this 
comic Nazi routine being inspired by her surname. 

“I can’t find them,” German accent all right, “I don’t 
see too well.” 

“Well, we'll see if we can’t help you here—ah! what’s 
_ this? Miss Miiller-Hochleben!” 

“Ta. hy a) 
“What do they look like, these eyeglasses?” 

“They are white—” 

“With clever little rhinestones all around the rims, Frau- 
lein? eh?” : 

“Ja, ja, und mit—” 

“And running down all the earpieces too, a-and feathers?” 

“Ostrich feathers. . . .” 

“Male ostrich feathers, dyed a stunning peacock blue, 
sprouting off the edges?” 


“ 


\ 


‘ 
} 
3 
iS 


a 


y 


738 Gravity’s RAInsow | 


“That is my eyeglasses, ja,” sez the groping secretary, 
“where are they, please?” 

“Right here!” bringing his foot down CRUNCH, smash- 
ing them to bright arctic gatherings all over Pointsman’s 
rug. 

“T-say,” offers Rézsavélgyi from a far comer: the one 
corner of the room, by the way, which is not brightly lit, 
yes kind of an optic anomaly here, just a straight, square 
room, no odd-shaped polyhedrons in Twelfth House . . . and 
still, this strange, unaccountable prism of shadow in the 
comer .., more than one visitor has popped in to find Mr. 
Pointsman not at his desk where he ought to be but stand- 
ing in the shadow-corner—most disturbingly facing into it. 
... Rézsavélgyi is not himself that fond of the Corner, he’s 
tried it a few times but only came out shaking his head: 
“Mis-ter Pointsman, I-don’t like it in there, at all. What 
poss-ible kind, of a thrill can an-yone get, from such an 
unwholesome experience. Eh?” raising one crookedly wist- 
ful eyebrow. Pointsman had only looked apologetic, not 
for himself but to something for Rézsavélgyi, and said 
gently; “This is one spot in the room where I feel alive,” 
well bet your ass one or two. memos went up toward 
Ministerial level over that one. If they reached ‘the Minister 
himself, it was probably as office entertainment. “Oh yes, 
yes,” shaking his wise old head of sheep’s wool, high, 
almost Slavic cheekbones crinkling his eyes up into an 
inattentive but polite laughter, “yes Pointsman’s famous 
Corner, yes... wouldn’t be surprised if it was haunted, 
eh?” Reflex laughs from the underlings present, though 
only grim smiles from the overlings. “Get the S.P.R. in, to 
have a look,” giggles someone with a cigar. “The poor 
bloke will think he’s back in the War again.” “Hear, hear,” 
and, “That’s a good one, all right,” ring through the layer- 
ing smoke. Practical jokes are all the rage among these 
particular underlings, a kind of class tradition. 

“You say what,” Roger has been screaming for a while, 

“T-say,” sez Rézsavilgyi, again. zt 

“You say, ‘I say’? Is that itP Then you should have said, 
‘I say, “I say.”’” * biche / pe 

“T did.” 6 Oe 

“No, no—you said, ‘I say,’ once, is what you—” 

“A-ha! But I said it again. I-said it . .. twice.” he 


The Counterforce 739 


“But that was after I asked you the question—you can’t 
tell me the two ‘I say’s were both part of the same state- 
ment,” unless, “that’s asking me to be unreasonably,” unless 
it’s really true that, “credulous, and around you that’s a 
form of,” that we're the same person, and that the whole 
exchange was ONE SINGLE THOUGHT yaaagggbhh 
and that means, “insanity, Rézsavolgyi—” 

“My glasses,” snivels Fraulein Miiller-Hochleben, now 
crawling around the room, Mexico scattering the glass 
splinters with his shoe so that now and then the unfortu- 
nate girl will cut a hand or a knee, beginning to trail dark 
little feathers of blood for inches at a time, eventually 
—assuming she were to last long enough—dotting in 

_Pointsman’s rug like the train of a Beardsley gown. 

“You're doing fine, Miss Miller-Hochleben!” cries Roger 
encouragingly, “and as for you, you—” but is stopped on 
noticing how Rdézsavélgyi now is nearly invisible in the 
shadow, and how the whites of his eyes are actually 
glowing white, jittering around in the air, winking-out- 
coming-back ... it is costing Rdézsavélgyi an effort to stay 
in this shadow-corner. It is not, at all, his sort of place. 
For one thing, the rest of the room seems to be at more 
of a distance, as through the view-finder on a camera. And 
the walls—they don’t appear to be... well, solid, actually. 
They flow: a coarse, a viscous passage, rippling like a 
standing piece of silk or nylon, the color watery gray but 

now and then with a surprise island in the flow, some color 
absolutely foreign to this room: saffron spindles, palm- 
) green ovals, magenta firths rmmmning comblike into jagged 
comicbook-orange chunks of island as the wounded fighter- 
_ plane circles, jettisons the tanks, then the silver canopy, 
sets the flaps to just above a stall; wheels up as the blue 
(suddenly, such a violent blue!) rushes in just before 
impact throttle closed uhhnnhh! oh shit the reef, we're 
going to smash up on the—oh. Oh, there’s no reef? We- 
we're safeP We are! Mangoes, I see mangoes on that tree 
over there! a-and there’s a girl—there’s a lotta girlsl 
-Lookit, they’re all gorgeous, their tits point straight out, 
_and they’re all swingin’ those grass skirts, playin’ ukuleles 
‘and singing (though why are the voices so hard and 
‘ ot so nasally like the voices of an American chorus 
\ er )— 


740 Gravirty’s Rainsow 


White man welcome ta Puke-a-hook-a-look-i I-i-i-island! 

One taste o’ my pa-paya and y'll never wanna go 
a-waaaay! 

Moon like a yel-low ba-na-na, 

Hangin’ over, my ca-ba-na, 

And lotsa hula, hula games to play— 

Oh the stars are fallin’ over Puke-a-hook-a-look-i Island, 

And the lava down the mountain’s runnin’ scrump-shus as 
a cherry pie— 

Even Sweet Leilani in the Little Grass Shack 

Loves a coconut monkey and a missionary snack, 

Looky-looky, sugar cookie, you’re on Puke-a-hook-a-look-i 
1-i-i-islandl 


O-boy, o-boy—go-ing to nail me, one, of those lit-tle is-land 
love-lies, spend, the rest... of my life, eat-ing pa-pay-as, 
fra-grant as the cunt, of young paradise— 

When paradise was young. The pilot is turning to 
Rézsavolgyi, who is still strapped in safety harness behind 
him. The face is covered with helmet, goggles that reflect 
too much light, oxygen mask—a face of metal, leather, 
isinglass. But now the pilot is raising the goggles, slowly, 
and whose eyes are these, so familiar, smiling hello, I know 
you, don’t you know me? Don’t you really know me? 

Rézsavilgyi screams and backs out of the corner, shiver- 
ing, blinded now in the overhead lights, Fraulein Miller- 
Hochleben is crawling around and around in the same 
circle, faster and faster, nearly a blur, croaking hysteri- 
cally. Both have reached the exact level Roger’s subtle 
psychological campaign here was intended to work them 
up to. Quietly but firmly: “Right. Now for the last time, 
where is Mr. Pointsman?” 

“Mossmoon’s office,” they reply, in unison. 

Mossmoon’s office is a roller-skate ride away from White- 
hall, and guarded by room after room of sentinel girls, 
each of them wearing a frock of a radically different color 
from the others (and this goes on for a while, so you can 
imagine what 3-sigma colors these are to begin with, if 
that many can be so “radically different,” you know, like 
that—oh, colors such as lizard, evening star, pale Atlantis 
to name a few), and whom Roger ro 2s, bribes, threat- 
ens, double-talks and (sigh) yes punches his way through 
till finally “Mossmoon,” pounding on this gigantic oak 


The Counterforce ‘JAI 


door, carved like the stone doorways of certain temples, 
“Pointsman, the jig’s up! In the name of whatever marginal 
decency enables you to get through the day without being 
shot dead by the odd armed stranger, open this door.” 
This is quite a long speech, and the door actually opens 
halfway through, but Roger finishes it up anyhow. He’s 
looking into a room of incandescent lemon-lime subdued 
drastically, almost to the milky point of absinthe-and- 
water, a room warmer than this tableful of faces really 
deserves, but perhaps it’s Roger’s entrance that deepens 
the color a bit now as he runs and jumps on the polished 
table, over the polished head of a director of a steel com- 
pany, skidding 20 feet down the waxed surface to confront 
the man at the end, who sits with a debonair (well, 
snotty) smile on his face. “Mossmoon, I’m on to you.” Has 
he actually come inside, in among the hoods, eye-slits, gold 
paraphernalia, the incense and the thighbone scepter? 

“That’s not Mossmoon,” Mr. Pointsman clearing his 
throat as he speaks, “Mexico do come down off the table 
won't you... gentlemen, one of my old PISCES col- 
leagues, brilliant but rather unstable, as you may’ve noted 
—oh, Mexico, really—” 

Roger has unbuttoned his fly, taken his cock out, and is 
now busy pissing on the shiny table, the papers, in the 
ashtrays and pretty soon on these poker-faced men. them- 
selves, who, although executive material all right, men of 
hair-trigger minds, are still not quite willing to admit that 
this is happening, you know; in any world that really touches, 
at too many points, the one they're accustomed to... and 
actually the fall of warm piss is quite pleasant as it sweeps 
by, across ten-guinea crayats, creative-looking little beards, | 
up into a liver-spotted nostril, across a pair of Army-issue 
steel-rim eyeglasses, slashing up and down starched fronts, 
Phi Beta Kappa keys, Legions of Honour, Orders of Lenin, 
Tron Crosses, V.C.s, retirement watchchains, Dewey-for- 
President lapel pins, half-exposed service revolvers, and 
even a sawed-off shotgun under the shoulder there.... 

“Pointsman,” the cock, stubborn, annoyed, bucks like 
an airship among purple clouds (very dense purple, as pile 

velvet that color) at nightfall when the sea-breeze promises 
a difficult landing, “I’ve saved you for last. But—goodness, 
I don’t seem to have any urine left, here. Not even a drop. 


s 


742 Gravity's RAINBOW 


I'm so sorry. Nothing left for you at all. Do you under- 
stand? If it means giving my life,” the words have just 
come out, and maybe Roger’s exaggerating, but maybe 
not, “there will be nothing anywhere for you. What you 
get, I'll take. If you go higher in this, Pll come and get 
you, and take you back down. Wherever you go. Even 
should you find a spare moment of rest, with an under- 
standing woman in a quiet room, I'll be at the window. 
Til always be just outside. You will never cancel me. If 
you come out, I'll go in, and the room will be defiled for 
you, haunted, and you'll have to find another. If you stay 
inside I'll come in anyway—I'll stalk you room to room till 
I corner you in the last. You'll have the last room, Points- 
man, and you'll have to live in it the rest of your scum, 
prostituted life.” 

Pointsman won’t look at him. Won’t meet his eyes. 
That’s what Roger wanted. The security police show up as 
an anticlimax, although aficionados of the chase scene, 
those who cannot look at the Taj Mahal, the Uffizi, the 
Statue of Liberty without thinking chase scene, chase 
scene, wow yeah Douglas Fairbanks scampering across 
that moon minaret there—these enthusiasts may find inter- 
est in the following: 

Roger dives under the table to unbutton his fly and 
the zealous flatties leap at each other over the top of the 
table, colliding and cursing, but Roger has gone scuttling 
down the horsehide, hobnailed, pinstriped, Mom ’s-argyle- 
socked sublevel of these conspirators above, a precarious 
passage, any one foot could kick untelegraphed and wipe 
him out—till he arrives back at the bald steel-magnate, 
reaches up, grabs him by the necktie or the cock, which- 
ever it’s easiest to get a hold on, and drags the man down 
under the table. 

“Right. Now, we're going to get but of here, and you're 
my hostage, get it?” He emerges dragging the livid execu- 
tive by his necktie or cock, pulling him like a child’s sleigh 
strangling and apoplectic out the door, past the modally 
unusual rainbow of sentinel-ladies now intimidated-looking 

at least, sirens already wailing in the street MANIAC AS- 
SAULTS OIL PARLEY Ousted After ——ing on Conferees and — 
he’s out of the elevator by now running down a back > 
corridor to a central-heating complex zoom! over the heads 


- The Counterforce 743 


of a couple of black custodians who are passing back and 


forth a cigarette rolled from some West African narcotic 
herb, stuffs his hostage into a gigantic furnace which is 
banked for the spring (too bad), and flees out the back 
way down an aisle of plane trees into a small. park, over 
a fence zippety zop, fastfoot Roger and the London cops. 

There’s nothing back at “The White Visitation” he really 
needs. Nothing he can’t let go. Clothes on his back and 
the pool motorcycle, a pocket full of spare change and 
anger unlimited, what more does a 30-year-old innocent 
need to make his way in the city? “I’m fucking Dick Whit- 
tington!” it occurs to him zooming down Kings Road, “I've 
come to London! I’m your Lord Mayor. ...” 

Pirate is home, and apparently expecting Roger. Pieces 
of his faithful Mendoza lie about the refectory table, shin- 
ing with oil or bluing, wads, patches, rods, bottles occupy 
his hands, but his eager eyes are on Roger. 

“No,” cutting into a denunciation of Pointsman when 
Milton Gloaming’s name comes up, “it’s a minor item, but 
stop right there. Pointsman didn’t send him. We sent him.” 

“We.” ‘ 

“You're a novice paranoid, Roger,” first time Prentice 
has ever used his Christian name and it touches Roger | 
enough to check his tirade. “Of course a well-developed 
They-system is necessary—but it’s only half the story. For 
every They there ought to be a We. In our case there is. 
Creative paranoia means developing at least as thorough 


a We-system as a They-system—” 


“Wait, wait, first where’s the Haig and Haig, be a gra- 
cious host, second what is a “They-system, I don’t pull 
Chebychev’s Theorem on you, do IP” 

“I mean what They and Their hired psychiatrists call 
‘delusional systems.’ Needless to say, ‘delusions’ are always’ 
officially defined. We don’t have to worry about questions 
of real or unreal. They only talk out of expediency. It’s 


the system that matters. How the data arrange themselves 


inside it. Some are consistent, others fall apart. Your idea 
that Pointsman sent Gloaming takes a wrong fork. Without 


any contrary set of delusions—delusions about ourselves, 
_which I’m calling a We-system—the Gloaming idea might 
have been.all right—” 


¥ 
. 


“Delusions about ourselves?” 


\ 


i 


ji 


744 Graviry’s RaInsBow 


“Not real ones.” 

“But officially defined.” 

“Out of expediency, yes.” 

“Well, you’re playing Their game, then.” 

“Don’t let it bother you. You'll find you can operate 
quite well. Seeing as we haven't won yet, it isn’t really 
much of a problem.” 

Roger is totally confused. At this point, in wanders who 
but Milton Gloaming with a black man Roger recognizes 
now as one of the two herb-smokers in the furnace room 
under Clive Mossmoon’s office. His name is Jan Otyiyumbu, 
and he’s a Schwarzkommando liaison man. One of Blodgett 
Waxwing’s apache lieutenants shows up with his girl, 
who’s not walking so much as dancing, very fluid and 
slow, a dance in which Osbie Feel, popping out of the 
kitchen now with his shirt off (and a Porky Pig tattoo on 
his stomach? How long has Feel had that?) correctly iden- 
tifies the influence of heroin. 

It’s a little bewildering—if this is a “We-system,” why 
isn’t it at least thoughtful enough to interlock in a reason- 
able way, like They-systems do? 

“That’s exactly it,” Osbie screams, belly-dancing Porky 
into a wide alarming grin, “They're the rational ones. We 
piss on Their rational arrangements. Don’t we . . . Mexico?” 

“Hoorah!” cry the others. Well taken, Osbie. 

Sir Stephen Dodson-Truck sits by the window, cleaning 
a Sten. Outside, blowing over its dorsal and summer still- 
ness, London today can feel advance chills of Austerity. 
There isn’t a word in Sir Stephen’s head right now. He is 
completely involved with the weapon. He no longer thinks 
about his wife, Nora, although she’s out there, in some 
room, still surrounded by her planetary psychics, and 
aimed herself now toward a peculiar fate. In recent weeks, 
in true messianic style, it has come clear to her that her 
real identity is, literally, the Force of Gravity. I am Grav- 
ity, I am That against which the Rocket must struggle, 
to which the prehistoric wastes submit’ and are trans- 
muted to the very substance of History. .|.. Her wheeling — 
freaks, her seers, teleporters, astral travelers and tragic — 
human interfaces all know of her visitation, but none see 
any way for her to turn. She must prove herself now—find 
deeper forms of renunciation, deeper than Sabbatai Zvi's 
apostasy before the Sublime Porte. It is a situation not 


The Counterforce : 745 


without its chances for a grood practical joke now and then 
—poor Nora will be suckered into séances that wouldn't 
fool your great-aunt, visits from the likes of Ronald 
Cherrycoke in a Jesus Christ getup, whistling down the 
wires into a hidden ultraviolet baby spot where he will 
start fluorescing in most questionable taste, blithering odd 
bits of Gospel together, reaching down from his crucified 
“altitudes to. actually cop feels of Nora’s girdled behind 
... highly offended, she will flee into hallways full of 
clammy invisible hands—poltergeists will back toilets up 
on her, ladylike turds will bob at her virgin vertex, and 
screaming ugh, ass dripping, girdle around her knees, she 
will go staggering into her own drawing-room to find no 
refuge even there, no, someone will have caused to materi- 
alize for her a lesbian elephant soixante-neuf, slimy trunks 
pistoning symmetrically in and out of juicy elephant 
vulvas, and when she tums to escape this horrible exhibi- 
tion she'll fnd some playful ghost has latched the door 
behind her, and another’s just about to sock her in the face - 
with a cold Yorkshire pudding. ... 

In Pirate’s maisonette, everyone is singing now a 
counterforce traveling song, with Thomas Gwenhidwy, 
who has not fallen to the dialectic curse of Pointsman’s 
Book after all, accompanying on what seems to be a rose- 
wood crwth: 


They've been sleeping on your shoulder, 
They’ve been crying in your beer, 
And They’ve sung you all Their sad lullabies, 
And you thought They wanted sympathy and didn’t care 
for souls, ‘ 
And They never were about to put you wise. 
But I’m telling you today, 
_ That it ain’t the only way, : 
And there’s shit you won't be eating any more— 
They’ve been paying you to love it, 
But the time has come to shove it, 
And it isn’t a resistance, it’s a war. 


“Ts a war,” Roger sings, driving into Cuxhaven, won- 
dering offhand how Jessica has cut her hair for Jeremy, 
and ‘how that insufferable prig would look with a thrust © 

chamber wrapped around his head, “it’s a war. . mS 


* 


746 Gravity's Rainsow | 


Light one up before you mosey out that door, 
Once you cuddled ’em and kissed ’em, 

But we’re bringin’ down Their system, 

And it isn’t a resistance, it’s a war.... 


O 


These pine limbs, crackling so blue and watery, don’t seem 
to put out any heat at all, Confiscated weapons and ammo 
lie around half-crated or piled loose inside the C-Company 
perimeter. For days the U.S. Army has been out sweeping 
Thuringia, busting into houses in the middle of the night. 
A certain lycanthropophobia fear of Werewolves occupies 
minds at higher levels. Winter is coming. Soon there won't 
be enough food or coal in Germany. Potato crops toward 
the end of the War, for example, all went to make alcohol 
for the rockets. But there are still small-arms aplenty, and 
ammunition to fit them. Where you cannot feed, you take 
away weapons. Weapons and food have been firmly linked 
in the governmental mind for as long as either has been 
around. . 

On the mountainsides, patches will flash up now and 
then, bright as dittany in July at the Zippo’s ceremonial 
touch. Pfc. Eddie Pensiero, a replacement here in the 
89th Division, also an amphetamine enthusiast, sits hud- 
dling nearly on top of the fite, shivering and watching the 
divisional patch on his arm, which ordinarily resembles a 
cluster of rocket-noses seen out of a dilating asshole, all 
in black and olive-drab, but which now looks like some- 
thing even stranger than that, which Eddie will think of 
in a minute. . 

Shivering is one of Eddie Pensiero’s favorite pastimes. 
Not the kind of shiver normal people get, the goose-on- 
the-grave passover and gone, but shivering that doesn’t 
stop. Very hard to get used to at first. Eddie is a con- 
noisseur of shivers. He is even able, in some strange way, 
to read them, like Siure Bummer reads reefers, like Miklos 
Thanatz reads whip-scars, But the gift isn’t limited just 
to Eddie’s own shivers, oh no, they’rd other people’s 
_ shivers, too! Yeah they come in one by one, they come in 

all together in groups (lately he’s been growing in his 


The Counterforce 747 


brain a kind of discriminator circuit, learning how to sep- 
arate them out), Least interesting of these shivers are the 
ones with a perfectly steady frequency, no variation to 
them at all. The next-to-least interesting are the freqency- 
modulated kind, now faster now slower depending on in- 
formation put in at the other end, wherever that might be. 
Then you have the irregular waveforms that change both 
in frequency and in amplitude. They have to be Fourier- 
analyzed into their harmonics, which is a little tougher. 
There is often coding involved, certain subfrequencies, cer- 
tain power-levels—you have to be pretty good to get the 
hang of these. 

“Hey Pensiero.” It is Eddie’s Sergeant, Howard (“Slow”) 
Lerner. “Getcher ass offa dat fire.” 

“Aww, Sarge,” chatters Eddie, “c’mon. I wuz just tryin’ 
ta get wawm.” 

“No ick-skew-siz, Pensiero! One o’ th’ koinels wants his 
hair cut, right now, an’ yer it!” 

“Ahh, youse guys,” mutters Pensiero, crawling over to 
his sleeping bag and looking through his pack for comb 
and scissors. He is the company barber. His haircuts, 
which take hours and often days, are immediately recog- 
nizable throughout the Zone, revealing as they do the 
hhair-by-hair singlemindedness of the “benny” habitué. 

The colonel is sitting, waiting, under an electric bulb. 
The bulb is receiving its power from another enlisted man, 
who sits back in the shadows hand-pedaling the twin 
generator cranks. It is Eddie’s friend Private Paddy 
(“Electro”) McGonigle, an Irish lad from New Jersey, one 
of those million virtuous and adjusted city poor you know 
from the movies—you’ve seen them dancing, singing, 
hanging out the washing on the lines, getting drunk at 
wakes, worrying about their children going bad, I just 
don’t know any more Faather, he’s a good. b’y but he’s 
runnin’ with a crool crowd, on through every wretched 
Hollywood lie down to and including this year’s big hit, 
A Tree Grows in Brooklyn. With his crank here young 
Paddy is practicing another form of Eddie’s gift, though 
he’s transmitting not receiving. The bulb appears to burn 
steadily, but this is really a succession of electric peaks 
and valleys, passing by at a speed that depends on how 
fast Paddy is cranking. It’s only that the wire inside the 


7 e F jl 
748 Gravity’s RaInsow — 


bulb unbrightens slow enough before the next peak shows 
up that fools us into seeing a steady light. It’s really a 
train of imperceptible light and dark. Usually impercepti- 
ble. The message is never conscious on Paddy’s part. It is 
sent by muscles and skeleton, by that circuit of his body 
which has learned to work as a source of electrical power. 

Right now Eddie Pensiero is shivering and not paying 
much attention to that light bulb. His own message is 
interesting enough. Somebody close by, out in the night, 
is playing a blues on a mouth harp. “Whut’s dat?” Eddie 
wants to know, standing under the white light behind the 
silent colonel in his dress uniform, “hey, McGonigle—you 
hear sump’nP” 

“Yeah,” jeers Paddy from behind the generator, “I hear 
yer dischodge, flyin’ away, wit’ big wings comin’ outa th’ 
ass end, Dat’s whut I hear! Yuk, yuk!” 

“Aw, it’s th’ bunk!” replies Eddie Pensiero, “Y-you don’t 
hear no dischodge, ya big dumbheaded Mick.” 

“Hey, Pensiero, ya know whut a Eye-talian submarine 
sounds like, on dat new sonar? Huh?” 

“Uh... whut?” 

“Pinnnggguinea- -guinea-guinea wopwopwop! Dat’s whet! 
Yuk, yuk, yu KI” 

“Fuck youse,” sez Eddie, and commences combing ths 
colonel’s silver-black hair. 

The moment the comb contacts his head, the colonel 
begins to speak. “Ordinarily, we'd spend no more than 24 
hours on a house-to-house sweep. Sundown to sundown, 
house to house. There’s a quality of black and gold to 
either end of it, that way, silhouettes, shaken skies pure as 
a cyclorama. But these sunsets, out here, I don’t know. 
Do you suppose something has exploded somewhere? 
Really—somewhere in the East? Another Krakatoa? An- 
other name at least that exotic... the colors are so differ- 
ent now. Volcanic ash, or any finely-divided substance, 

- suspended in the atmosphere, can diffract the colors 
strangely. Did you know that, sonP Hard to believe, isn’t 
it? Rather a long taper if you don’t mind, and just short 
of combable on top. Yes, Private, the colo change, and 
how! The question is, are they chan according to 

_ something? Is the sun’s everyday spectrum being modu- 

lated? Not at random, but ae by this unknown 


_The Counterforce 749 


debris in the prevailing winds? Is there information for 
us? Deep questions, and disturbing ones. 

“Where are you from, son? I’m from Kenosha, Wiscon- 
sin. My folks have a little farm back there. Snowfields and 
fenceposts all the way to Chicago. The snow covers the 
old cars up on blocks in the yards .. . big white bundles... 
it looks like Graves Registration back there in Wisconsin.” 

“Heh, heh... .” 

“Hey Pensiero,” calls Paddy McGonigle, “ya still hearin’ . 
dat sound?” 

“Yeah uh I tink it’s a mouth-organ,” Pensiero busily 
combing up single hairs, cutting each one a slightly differ- 
ent length, going back again and again to touch up here 
and there...God is who knows their. number. Atropos 
is who severs them to different lengths. So, God under the 
aspect of Atropos, she who cannot be turned, is in posses- 
sion of Eddie Pensiero tonight. 

“I got your mouth organ,” jeers Paddy, “right herel 
Look! A wop clarinet!” 

Each long haircut is a passage. Hair is yet another kind 
of modulated frequency. Assume a state of grace in which 
all hairs were once distributed perfectly even, a time of 
innocence when they fell perfectly straight, all over the 
colonel’s head. Winds of the day, gestures of distraction, 
sweat, itchings, sudden surprises, three-foot falls to the edge 
of sleep, watched skies, remembered shames, all have since 
written on that perfect grating. Passing through it tonight, 
restructuring it, Eddie Pensiero is an agent of History. 
Along with the reworking of the colonel’s head runs the 
shiver-bome blues—long runs in number 2 and 3 hole 
correspond, tonight anyway, to passages in the deep 
reaches of hair, birch trunks in a very humid summer night, 
approaches to a stone house in a wooded park, stags 
paralyzed beside the high flagged walks. ... 

Blues is a matter of lower sidebands—you suck a clear 
note, on pitch, and then bend it lower with the muscles of 
your face. Muscles of your face have been laughing, tight 
with pain, often trying not to betray any emotion, all your 
life. Where you send the pure note is partly a function of 
that. There’s that secular basis for blues, if the spiritual 
angle bothers you.... : 

“I didn’t know where I was,” relates the colonel. “I kept 


y 


750 Gravity’s Ramsow 


climbing downward, along these big sheared chunks of 
concrete. Black reinforcing rod poking out... black rust. 
There were touches of royal purple in the air, not bright 
enough to blur out over their edges, or change the sub- 
stance of the night. They dribbled down, lengthening out, 
one by one—ever seen a chicken fetus, just beginning? oh 
of course not, you're a city boy. There’s a lot to learn, out 
on the farm. Teaches you what a chicken fetus looks like, 
so that if you happen to be climbing around a concrete 
mountain in the dark, and see one, or several, up in the 
sky reproduced in purple, youll know what they look 
like—that’s a heap better than the city, son, there you 
just move from crisis to crisis, each one brand-new, noth- 
ing to couple it back onto. ...” 

Well, there he is, cautiously edging along the enormous 
ruin, his hair at the moment looking very odd—brushed 
forward from one occipital spot, forward and up in great 
long points, forming a black sunflower or sunbonnet 
around his face, in which the prominent feature is the 
colonel’s long, crawling magenta lips. Things grab up for 
him out of crevices among the debris, sort of fast happy 
lunge out and back in, thin pincer arms, nothing personal, 
just thought I'd grab a little night air, ha, hal When they 
miss the colonel—as they always.seem to do—why they 
just zip back in with a gambler’s ho-hum, well, maybe 
next time.... 

Dammit, cut off from my regiment here, gonna be cap- 
tured and cremated by dacoits! Oh Jesus there they are 
now, unthinkable Animals running low in the light from 
the G-5 version of the city, red and yellow turbans, 
scarred dope-fiend faces, faired as the front end of a *37 
Ford, same undirected eyes, same exemption from the 
Karmic Hammer— / 

A ’37 Ford, exempt from the K.H.? C’mon quit fooling, 
They'll all end up in junkyards same as th’ rest! 

Oh, will they, Skippy? Why are there so many on the 
roads, then? ai hy 

W-well gee, uh, Mister Information, th-th’ War, I mean 
there’s no new cars being built right now so we all have to 
keep our Old Reliable in tiptop shape cause there’s not too 
many mechanics left here on the home front, a-and we 
shouldn’t hoard gas, and we should keep that A-sticker 
prominently displayed in the lower right— 


‘The Counterforce 751 


Skippy, you little fool, you are off on another of your 
senseless and retrograde journeys. Come back, here, to the 
points. Here is where the paths divided. See the man back 
there. He is wearing a white hood. His shoes are brown. 
He has a nice smile, but nobody sees it. Nobody sees it 
because his face is always in the dark. But he is a nice 
man. He is the pointsman. He is called that because he 
throws the lever that changes the points. And we go to 
Happyville, instead of to Pain City. Or “Der Leid-Stadt,” 
that’s what the Germans call it. There is a mean poem 
about the Leid-Stadt, by a German man named Mr. Rilke. © 
But we will not read it, because we are going to Happy- 
ville. The pointsman has made sure we'll go there, He 
hardly has to work at all. The lever is very smooth, and 
easy to push. Even you could push it, Skippy. If you 
knew where it was. But look what a lot of work he has 
done, with just one little push. He has sent us all the way 
to Happyville, instead of to Pain City, That is because he 
knows just where the points and the lever are. He is the 
only kind of man who puts in very little work and makes 
big things happen, all over the world. He could have sent 
you on the right trip back. there, Skippy. You can have 
your fantasy if you want, you probably don’t deserve any- 
thing better, but Mister Information tonight is in a kind 
mood. He will show you Happyville. He will begin by 
reminding you of the 1937 Ford. Why is that dacoit-faced 
auto still on the roads? You said “the War,” just as you 
rattled over the points onto the wrong track. The War was 
the set of points. Eh? Yesyes, Skippy, the truth is that the 
War is keeping things alive. Things. The Ford is only 
one of them. The Germans-and-Japs story was only one, 
rather surrealistic version of the real War. The real War is 
always there. The dying tapers off now and then, but the 
War is still killing lots and lots of people. Only right now 
it is killing them in more subtle ways. Often in ways that 
are too complicated, even for us, at this level, to trace. 
But the right people are dying, just as they do when 
armies fight. The ones who stand up, in Basic, in the 
middle of the machine-gun pattem. The ones who do not 
have faith in their Sergeants. The ones who slip and show 
a moment’s weakness to the Enemy. These are the ones 
the War cannot use, and so they die. The right ones sur- 
vive. The others, it’s said, even know they have a short 


752 Gravity's RAINBOW 


life expectancy. But they persist in acting the way they 
do. Nobody knows why. Wouldn’t it be nice if we could 
eliminate them completely? Then no one would have to 
be killed in the War. That would be fun, wouldn’t it, 
Skippy? 

Jeepers, it sure would, Mister Information! Wow, I-I 
can’t wait to see Happyvillel 

Happily, he doesn’t have to wait at all. One of the 
dacoits comes leaping with a whistling sound, ecru silk 
cord strung buzzing tight between his fists, eager let’s-get- 
to-it grin, and just at the same moment a pair of arms 
comes up out of a fissure in the ruins, and gathers the 
colonel down to safety just in time. The dacoit falls on his 
ass, and sits there trying to pull the cord apart, muttering 
oh shit, which even dacoits do too. 

“You are under the mountain,” a voice announces. Stony 
cave-acoustics in here. “Please remember from this point 
on to obey all pertinent regulations.” 

His guide is a kind of squat robot, dark gray plastic 
with rolling headlamp eyes. It is shaped something like a 
crab, “That’s Cancer in Latin,” sez the robot; “and in 
Kenosha, too!” It will prove to be addicted to one-liners 
that never quite come off for anyone but it. 

“Here is Muffin-tin Road,” announces the robot, “note 
the smiling faces on all the houses here.” Upstairs win- 
dows are eyes, picket fence is teeth, Nose is the front door. 

“Sa-a-a-y,” asks the colonel, taken by a sudden thought, 

“does it ever snow here in Happyville?” 

“Does what ever snow?” 

“You're evading.” 

“Tm evading-room vino from Visconsin,” sings this boor- 
ish machine, * ‘and you oughta see the nurses run! So what 
else is new, Jackson?” The squat creature is actually chew- 
ing gum, a Laszlo Jamf variation on polyvinyl chloride, 
very malleable, even sending out detachable molecules 
which, through an ingenious Osmo-elektrische Schalter- 
werke, developed by Siemens, is transmitting, in code, a 
damn fair approximation of Beeman's reeiaie flavor to the 
robot crab’s brain. 

“Mister Information always answers spittle 

“For what he’s making, I’'d even question answers. 
Does it ever snow? Of course it snows in 1 Happyville. Lotta 
snowmen’d sure be sore if it didn’t!” 


The Counterforce 753 


“T recall, back in Wisconsin, the wind used to blow 
right up the walk, like a visitor who expects to be let in. 
Sweeps the snow up against the front door, leaves it drifted 
there... . Ever get that in Happyville?” 

“Old stuff,” sez the robot. 

“Anybody ever open his front door, while the wind was 


- doing that, eh?” 


“Thousands of times.” 

“Then,” pounces the colonel, “if the door is the house’s 
nose, and the door is open, a-and all of those snowy-white 
crystals are blowing up from Muffin-tin Road in a big 
cloud right into the—” 

“Aagghh!” screams the plastic robot, and scuttles way 
into a narrow alley. The colonel finds himself alone in a 
brown and wine-aged district of the city: sandstone and 
adobe colors sweep away in a progress of walls, rooftops, 
streets, not a tree in sight, and who’s this come strolling 
down the Schokoladestrasse? Why, it’s Laszlo Jamf him- 
self, grown to a prolonged old age, preserved like a °37 
Ford against the World’s ups and downs, which are never 
more than damped-out changes in smile, wide-pearly to 
wistfully gauze, inside Happyville here. Dr. Jamf is wear- 
ing a bow tie of a certain limp grayish lavender, a color 
for long dying afternoons through conservatory windows, 
minor-keyed lieder about days gone by, plaintive pianos, 
pipesmoke in a stuffy parlor, overcast Sunday walks by 
canals... here the two men are, dry-scratched precisely, 
attentively on this afternoon, and the bells across the canal 
are tolling the hour: the men have come from very far 
away, after a journey neither quite remembers, on a mis- 
sion of some kind. But each has been kept ignorant of the 
other’s role.... 

Now it turns out that this light bulb over the colonel’s 
head here is the. same identical Osram light bulb that 
Franz Pékler used to keep next to in his bunk at the under- 
ground rocket works at Nordhausen. Statistically (so Their 
story goes), every n-thousandth light bulb is gonna be 
perfect, all the delta-q’s piling up just right, so we shouldn’t 
be surprised that this one’s still around, burning brightly. 


_ But the truth is even more stupendous. This bulb is im- 


mortal! It’s been around, in fact, since the twenties, has 


that old-timery point at the tip and is less pear-shaped 


yn 


i 
A 


than more contemporary bulbs. Wotta history, this bulb, if 


te 


t 


754 Gravirty’s Ramnsow 


only it could speak—well, as a matter of fact, it can speak. 
It is dictating the muscular modulations of Paddy Mc- 
Gonigle’s cranking tonight, this is a loop here, with feed- 
back through Paddy to the generator again. Here it is, 


Tae Story oF BYRON THE BULB 


Byron was to’ve been manufactured by Tungsram in 
Budapest. He would probably have been grabbed up by 
the ace salesman Géza Roézsavélgyi’s father Sandor, who 
covered all the Transylvanian territory and had begun to 
go native enough to where the home office felt vaguely 
paranoid about him throwing some horrible spell on the 
whole operation if they didn’t give him what he wanted. 
Actually he was a salesman who wanted his son to be a 
doctor, and that came true. But it may have been the bad 
witch-leery auras around Budapest that got the birth of 
Byron reassigned at the last minute to Osram, in Berlin. 
Reassigned, yes. There is a Bulb Baby Heaven, amiably 
satirized as if it was the movies or something, well Big 
Business, ha, hal But don’t let Them fool you, this is a 
bureaucracy first, and a Bulb Baby Heaven only as a sort 
of sideline. All overhead—yes, out of its own pocket the 
Company is springing for square leagues of organdy, hogs- 
heads of IG Farben pink and blue Baby Dye, hundred- 
weights of clever Siemens Electric Baby Bulb Pacifiers, 
giving the suckling Bulb the shape of a 110-volt current 
without the least trickle of power. One way or another, 
these Bulb folks are in the business of providing the 
appearance of power, power against the night, without the 
reality. bi 

Actually, B.B.H. is rather shabby. The brown rafters 
drip cobwebs. Now and then a roach shows up on the 
floor, and all the Babies try to roll over to look (being 
Bulbs they seem perfectly symmetrical, Skippy, but don’t © 
forget the contact at the top of the thread), going uh-guhl 
uhhhh-guhl, glowing feebly at the bewildered roach sitting 
paralyzed and squashable out on the bare boards, rushing, 
reliving the terror of some sudden blast of| current out of 
nowhere and high overhead the lambent, all-seeing Bulb. 
In their innocence, the Baby Bulbs don’t know what to 
anake of this roach’s abreaction—they feel his fright, but 


The Counterforce 755 


don’t know what it is. They just want to be his friend. He’s 
interesting and has good moves. Everybody's excited ex- 
cept for Byron, who considers the other Bulb Babies a 
bunch of saps. It is a constant struggle to turn their 
thoughts on anything meaningful. Hi there Babies, I'm 
' Byron-the-Bulb! Here to sing a little song to you, that 
goes— 


Light-up, and-shine, you—in-cande-scent Bulb Ba-bies! 

Looks-like ya got ra-bies 

Just lay there foamin’ and a-screamin’ like a buncha 
little demons, 

I’m delivin’ unto you a king-dom of roa-ches, 

And no-thin’ ap-proaches 

That joyful feelin’ when-you’re up-on the ceilin’ 

Lookin’ down—night and day—on the king-dom you 
sur-vey, 

They'll come out *n’ love ya till the break of dawn, 

But they run like hell when that light comes on! 

So shine on, Baby Bulbs, you're the wave of the fu-ture, 

And I’m here to recruit ya, 

._ In mi great crusade, 

Just sing along Babies—come-on-and-join-the-big- 

pa-radel 


Trouble with Byron’s he’s an old, old soul, trapped in- 
side the glass prison of a Baby Bulb. He hates this place, 
lying on his back waiting to get manufactured, nothing to 
listen to on the speakers but Charleston music, now and 
then an address to the Nation, what kind of a setup’s that? 
_ Byron wants to get out of here and into it, needless to say 

he’s been developing all kinds of nervous ailments, Baby 
Bulb. Diaper Rash, which is a sort of corrosion on his 
screw threads, Bulb Baby Colic, a tight spasm of high re- 
‘sistance someplace among the deep loops of tungsten 
wire, Bulb Baby Hyperventilation, where it actually feels 
“oe his vacuum’s been broken though there is no organic 
asis. ..\. § 

‘When M-Day finally does roll around, you can bet 
_Byron’s elated. He has passed the time hatching some 
really insane grandiose plans—he’s gonna organize all the 
Bulbs, see, get him a power base in Berlin, he’s already 

hep to the Strobing Tactic, all you do is develop the knack 
_ (Yogic, almost) of shutting off and on at a rate close to 


756 Gravity’s Rainsow 


the human brain’s alpha rhythm, and you can actually 
trigger an epileptic fit! True. Byron has had a vision against 
the rafters of his ward, of 20 million Bulbs, all over 
Europe, at a given sychronizing pulse arranged by one of 
his many agents in the Grid, all these Bulbs beginning to 
strobe together, humans thrashing around the 20 million 
rooms like fish on the beaches of Perfect Energy— Atten- 
tion, humans, this has been a warning to you. Next time, 
a few of us will explode. Ha-ha. Yes we'll unleash our 
Kamikaze squads! You’ve heard of the Kirghiz Light? well 
that’s the ass end of a firefly compared to what we're 
gonna—oh, you haven’t heard of the—oh, well, too bad. 
Cause a few Bulbs, say a million, a mere 5% of our num- 
ber, are more than willing to flame out in one grand burst 
instead of patiently waiting out their design hours.... So 
Byron dreams of his Guerrilla Strike Force, gonna get 
Herbert Hoover, Stanley Baldwin, all of them, right in the 
face with one coordinated blast... . 

Is Byron in for a rude awakening! There is already an 
organization, a human one, known as “Phoebus,” the in- 
ternational light-bulb cartel, headquartered in Switzerland. 
Run pretty much by International GE, Osram, and Asso- 
ciated Electrical Industries of Britain, which are in turn 
owned 100%, 29% and 46%, respectively, by the General 
Electric Company in America. Phoebus fixes the prices 
and determines the operational lives of all the bulbs in the 
world, from Brazil to Japan to Holland (although Philips 
in Holland is the mad dog of the cartel, apt at any time 
to cut loose and sow disaster throughout the great Com- 
bination). Given this state of general repression, there 
seems noplace for a newborn Baby Bubb to start but at the 
bottom. 

But Phoebus doesn’t know yet that Byron is immortal. 
He starts out his career at an all-girl opium den in Charlot- 
tenburg, almost within sight of the statue. of Wernher 
Siemens, burning up in a sconce, one among many bulbs 
witnessing the more languorous forms of [Republican dec- 
adence. He gets to know all the bulbs in the place, Benito 
the Bulb over in the next sconce who’s always planning an 
escape, Bernie down the: hall in the toilet, who has all 
kinds of urolagnia jokes to tell, his mother Brenda in the 
kitchen who talks of hashish hush puppies, dildos rigged 


The Counterforce — 757 


to pump floods of paregoric orgasm to the capillaries of 
the womb, prayers to Astarte and Lilith, queen of the 
night, reaches into the true Night of the Other, cold and 
naked on linoleum floors after days without sleep, the 
dreams and tears become a natural state.... 

One by one, over the months, the other bulbs burn out, 
and are gone. The first few of these hit Byron hard. He’s 
‘still a new arrival, still hasn’t accepted his immortality. 
But on through the burning hours he starts to learn about 
the transience of .others: learns that loving them while 
theyre here becomes easier, and also more intense—to 
love as if each design-hour will be the last. Byron soon 
enough becomes a Permanent Old-Timer. Others can 
recognize his immortality on sight, but it’s never discussed 
except in a general way, when folklore comes flickering in 
from other parts of the Grid, tales of the Immortals, one in 
a kabbalist’s study in Lyons who’s supposed to know 
magic, another in Norway outside a warehouse facing 
arctic whiteness with a stoicism more southerly bulbs be- 
gin strobing faintly just at the thought of. If other Im- 
mortals are out there, they remain silent. But it is a silence 
with much, perhaps, everything, in it. 

After Love, then, Byron’s next lesson is Silence. 

As his burning lengthens toward 600 hours, the monitors 
in Switzerland begin to keep more of an eye on Byron. 
The Phoebus Surveillance Room is located under a little- 
known Alp, a chilly room crammed full of German electro 
hardware, glass, brass, ebonite, and silver, massive terminal 
blocks shaggy with copper clips and screws, and a cadre 
of super-clean white-robed watchers who wander meter to 
meter, light as snowdevils, making sure that nothing’s 
going wrong, that through no bulb shall the mean operat- 
ing life be extended. You can imagine what it would do 
to the market if that started happening. 

Byron passes Surveillance’s red-line at 600 hours, and 
immediately, as a matter of routine, he is checked out for 
filament resistance, burning temperature, vacuum, power 
consumption. Everything’s normal. Now Byron is to be 
checked out every 50 hours hereafter. A soft chime will 
go off in the monitoring station whenever it’s time. 

__ At 800 hours—another routine precaution—a Berlin 
agent is sent out to the opium den to transfer Byron. She 


758 Gravity’s RAINBow 


is wearing asbestos-lined kid gloves and seven-inch spike 
heels, no not so she can fit in with the crowd, but so that 
she can reach that sconce to unscrew Byron. The other 
bulbs watch, in barely subdued terror. The word goes out 
along the Grid. At something close to the speed of light, 
every bulb, Azos looking down the empty black Bakelite 
streets, Nitralampen and Wotan Gs at night soccer 
matches, Just-Wolframs, Monowatts and Siriuses, every 
bulb in Europe knows what’s happened. They are silent 
with impotence, with surrender in the face of struggles 
they thought were all myth. We can’t help, this common 
thought humming through pastures of sleeping sheep, 
down Autobahns and to the bitter ends of coaling piers in 
the North, there’s never been anything we could do.... 
Anyone shows us the meanest hope of transcending and 
the Committee on Incandescent Anomalies comes in and 
takes him away. Some do protest, maybe, here and there, 
but it’s only information, glow-modulated, harmless, noth- 
ing close to the explosions in the faces of the powerful 
that Byron once envisioned, back there in his Baby ward, 
in his innocence. 

He is taken to Neukdélln, to a basement room, the home 
of a glassblower who is afraid of the night and who will 
keep Byron glowing and on watch over all the flint bowls, 
the griffins and flower-ships, ibexes in mid-leap, green 
spider-webs, somber ice-deities. This is one of many so- 

called “control points,” where suspicious bulbs can be 
monitored easily. haw 8 

In less than a fortnight, a gong sounds along the ice 
and stone corridors of the Phoebus headquarters, and faces 
swivel over briefly from their meters. Not too many gongs 
around here. Gongs are special. Byron has passed 1000 
hours, and the procedure now is standard: the Committee 
on Incandescent Anomalies sends a hit man to Berlin. 

But here something odd happens. Yes, damned odd. The 
plan is to smash up Byron and send him back right there 
in the shop to cullet and batch—salvage the tungsten, of 
course—and let him be reincarnated in the glassblower’s 
next project (a balloon setting out on a journey from the 
top of a white skyscraper). This wouldn't be too bad a 
deal for Byron—he knows as well as Phoebus does how 
many hours he has on him. Here in the shop he’s watched 


The Counterforce 759 


enough glass being melted back into the structureless pool 
from which all glass forms spring and re-spring, and 
wouldn’t mind going through it himself. But he is trapped 
on the Karmic wheel. The glowing orange batch is a taunt, 
a cruelty. There’s no escape for Byron, he’s doomed to an 
infinite regress of sockets and bulbsnatchers. In zips young 
Hansel Geschwindig, a Weimar street urchin—twirls 
Byron out of the ceiling into a careful pocket and Ge- 
sssschhhhwindig! out the door again. Darkness invades the 
dreams of the glassblower. Of all the unpleasantries his 
dreams grab in out of the night air, an extinguished light 
is the worst. Light, in his dreams, was always hope: the 
basic, mortal hope. As the contacts break helically away, 
hope turns to darkness, and the glassblower wakes sharply 
tonight crying, “Who? Who?” 

Phoebus isn’t exactly thrown into a frenzy. It’s hap- 
pened before. There is still a procedure to follow. It 
means more overtime for some employees, so there’s that 
vague, full-boweled pleasure at the windfall, along with an 
equally vague excitement at the break in routine. You 
want high emotion, forget Phoebus. Their stonefaced 
search parties move out into the streets. They know more 
or less where in the city to look. They are assuming that 
no one among their consumers knows of Byron’s immortal- 
ity. So the data for Non-immortal Bulbsnatchings ought to 
apply also to Byron. And the data happen to hump up in 
poor sections, Jewish sections, drug, homosexual, prostitute, 
and magic sections of the capital. Here are the most logi- 
cal bulbsnatchers, in terms of what the crime is. Look at 
all the propaganda, It’s a moral crime. Phoebus discov- 
ered—one of the great undiscovered discoveries of our 
time—that consumers need to feel a sense of sin. That 
guilt, in proper invisible hands, is a most powerful 
weapon. In America, Lyle Bland and his psychologists had 
figures, expert testimony and money (money in the Puri- 
tan sense—an outward and visible O.K. on their inten- 
tions) enough to tip the Discovery of Guilt at the cusp 
between scientific theory and fact. Growth rates in later 
years were to bear Bland out (actually what bore Bland 

out was an honorary pallbearer sextet of all the senior 
members of Salitieri, Poore, Nash, De Brutus and Short, 
plus Lyle, Jr., who was sneezing. Buddy at the last min- 


DS) 


a 
is 


760 Gravity's RaInsow 


ute decided to go see Dracula. He was better off). Of all 
the legacies Bland left around, the Bulbsnatching Heresy 
was perhaps his grandest. It doesn’t just mean that some- 
body isn’t buying a bulb. It also means that same some- 
body is not putting any power in that socket! It is a sin 
both against Phoebus and against the Grid. Neither one is 
about to let that get out of hand. 

So, out go the Phoebus flatfoots, looking for the snatched 
Byron. But the urchin has already left town, gone to Ham- 
burg, traded Byron to a Reeperbahn prostitute so he can 
shoot up some morphine—the young woman’s customer to- 
night is a cost-accountant who likes to have light bulbs 
screwed into his asshole, and this john has also brought a 
little hashish to smoke, so by the time he leaves he’s for- 
gotten about Byron still there in his asshole—doesn’t ever, 
in fact, find out, because when he finally gets around to 
sitting down (having stood up in trolleys all the way 
home) it’s on his own home toilet and plop! there goes 
Byron in the water and flusssshhhh! away down ‘the waste 
lines to the Elbe estuary. He is just round enough to get 
through smoothly all the way. For days he floats over the 
North Sea, till he reaches Helgoland, that red-and-white 
Napoleon pastry tipped in the sea. He stays there for a 
while at a hotel between the Hengst and the Ménch, till 
being brought back one day to the mainland by a very old 
priest who’s been put hep to Byron’s immortality in the 
course of a routine dream about the taste of a certain 
1911 Hochheimer ...suddenly -here’s the great Berlin 
Eispalast, a booming, dim iron-trussed cavern, the smell of 
women in the blue shadows—perfumes, leathers, fur skat- 
ing-costumes, ice-dust in the air, flashing legs, jutting 
haunches, desire in grippelike flashes, helplessness at the 
end of a crack-the-whip, rocketing through beams of sun- 
light choked with the powdered ice, and a voice in the 
blurred mirror underfoot saying, “Find the one who has 
performed this miracle. He is a saint. Expose him. Expedite 
his canonization. ...” The name is on a list the old man 
presently draws up of about a thousand) tourists who’ve 
been in and out of Helgoland since Byron was found on 
the beach. The priest begins a search tol tain, footpath, 
and Hispano-Suiza, checking out each of the tourists on 
his list. But he gets no farther than Niimberg, where his 


The Counterforce 761 


valise, with Byron wrapped inside in an alb, is ripped off — 
by a transsectite, a Lutheran named Mausmacher who 
likes to dress up in Roman regalia. This Mausmacher, not 
content with standing in front of his own mirror making 
papal crosses, thinks it will be a really bizarre kick to go 
out to the Zeppelin field to a Nazi torchlight rally in full 
drag, and walk around blessing people at random. Green 
torches flaring, red swastikas, twinkling brasses and Father 
Mausmacher, checking out tits ’n’ asses, waistlines ’n’ 
baskets, humming a clerical little tune, some Bach riff, 
smiling as he moves through the Sieg Heils and choruses 
of “Die Fahne Hoch.” Unknown to him, Byron slides out 
of the stolen vestments onto the ground. He is then walked 
past by several hundred thousand boots and shoes, and 
not one so much as brushes him, natch. He is scavenged 
next day (the field now deathempty, columned, pale, 
streaked with long mudpuddles, morning clouds length- 
ening behind the gilded swastika and wreath) by a 
poor Jewish ragpicker, and taken on, on into another 15 
years of preservation against chance and against Phoebus. 
He will be screwed into mother (Mutter) after mother, as 
the female threads of German light-bulb sockets are 
known, for some reason that escapes everybody. 

The cartel have already gone over to Contingency Plan 
B, which assumes a seven-year statute of limitations, after 
which Byron will be considered legally burned out. Mean- 
while, the personnel taken off of Byron’s case are busy 
tracking a long-lived bulb that once occupied a socket on 
the porch of an army outpost in the Amazon jungle, 
Beatriz the Bulb, who has just been stolen, mysteriously, 
by an Indian raiding party. 

Through his years of survival, all these various rescues 
of Byron happen as if by accident. Whenever he can, he 
tries to instruct any bulbs nearby in the evil nature of 
Phoebus, and in the need for solidarity against the cartel. - 
He has come to see how Bulb must move beyond its role 
as conveyor of light-energy alone. Phoebus has restricted 
Bulb to this one identity. “But there are other frequencies, 
above and below the visible band. Bulb can give heat. 
Bulb can provide energy for plants to grow, illegal plants, 
inside closets, for example. Bulb can penetrate the sleeping 
eye, and operate among the dreams of men.” Some bulbs 


1 
MN 
aE eLigly 
va 
ve 
he 


. 


762, Gravity's RAINBOW 


listened attentively—others thought of ways to fink to 
Phoebus. Some of the older anti-Byronists were able to 
fool with their parameters in systematic ways that would 
show up on the ebonite meters under the Swiss mountain: 
there were even a few self-immolations, hoping to draw 
the hit men down. 
\ Any talk of Bulb’s transcendence, of course, was clear 
subversion. Phoebus based everything on bulb efficiency— 
the ratio of the usable power coming out, to the power put 
in. The Grid demanded that this ratio stay as small as 
possible. That way they got to sell more juice. On the 
other hand, low efficiency meant longer burning hours, and 
that cut into bulb sales for Phoebus. In the beginning 
Phoebus tried increasing filament resistance, reducing the 
hours of life on the sly and gradually—till the Grid noticed 
a fall-off in revenues, and started screaming. The two 
parties by and by reached an accord on a compromise 
bulb-life figure that would bring in enough money for 
both of them, and to go fifty-fifty on the costs of the anti- 
bulbsnatching campaign. Along with a more subtle attack 
against those criminal souls who forswear bulbs entirely 
and use candles. Phoebus’s long-standing arrangement with 
the Meat Cartel was to restrict the amount of tallow in 
circulation by keeping more fat in meat to be sold regard- 
less of cardiac problems that might arise, and redirecting 
most of what was trimmed off into soap production. Soap 
in those days was a booming concern. Among the con- 
sumers, the Bland Institute had discovered deep feelings 
about shit. Even at that, meat and soap were minor inter- 
locks of Phoebus. More important were items like tungsten. 
Another reason why Phoebus couldn’t cut down bulb life 
too far. Too many tungsten filaments would eat into avail- 
able stockpiles of the metal—China being the major world 
source, this also brought in very delicate questions of 
Eastern policy—and disturb the arrangement between 
General Electric and Krupp about how much tungsten 
carbide would be produced, where and when and what the 
prices would be. The guidelines settled on were $37—$90 a 
pound in Germany, $200-$400 a pound in the U.S. This 
directly governed the production of machine tools, and 
thus all areas of light and heavy industry. When the War 
came, some people thought it unpatriotic of GE to have 


—_ 


The Counterforce 763 


given Germany an edge like that. But nobody with any 
power. Don’t worry. 

Byron, as he burns on, sees more and more of this pat- 
tern. He learns how to make contact with other kinds of 
electric appliances, in homes, in factories and out in the 
streets. Each has something to tell him. The pattern gath- 
ers in his soul (Seele, as the core of the earlier carbon fila- 
ment was known in Germany), and the grander and 
clearer it grows, the more desperate Byron gets. Someday 
he will know everything, and still be as impotent as be- 
fore. His youthful dreams of organizing all the bulbs in 
the world seem impossible now—the Grid is wide open, 
all messages can be overheard, and there are more than 
enough traitors out on the line. Prophets traditionally don’t 
last long—they are either killed outright, or given an 
accident serious enough to make them stop and think, and 
most often they do pull back. But on Byron has been 
visited an even better fate. He is condemned to go on 
forever, knowing the truth and powerless to change any- 
thing. No longer will he seek to get off the wheel. His 
anger and frustration will grow without limit, and he will 
find himself, poor perverse bulb, enjoying it.... 


Laszlo Jamf walks away down the canal, where dogs 
are swimming now, dogs in packs, dogs heads bobbing 
down the scummy canals... dogs’ heads, chess knights, 
also may be found invisible in the air over secret airbases, 
in the thickest fogs, conditions of temperature, pressure 
and humidity form Springer-shapes the tuned flyer can 
feel, the radars can see, the helpless passengers can al- 
most glimpse, now and then, out the little window, as 
through sheets of vapor... it is the kind Dog, the Dog no 
man ever conditioned, who is there for us at beginnings 
and ends, and journeys we have to take, helpless, but not 
quite unwilling. ... The pleats in Jamf's suit go weaving | 
away like iris leaves in a backyard wind. The colonel is 
left alone in Happyville. The steel city waits him, the even 
cloud-light raising a white streak down each great build- 
ing, all of them set up as modulations on the perfect grid 
of the streets, each tower cut off at a different height— 
and where is the Comb that will move through this and 


764 Gravity’s RaiInsow 


restore the old perfect Cartesian harmony? where are the 
great Shears from the sky that will readjust Happyville? 

There is no need to bring in blood or violence here, But 
the colonel does have his head tilted back now in what 
may truly be surrender: his throat is open to the pain- 
radiance of the Bulb. Paddy McGonigle is the only other 
witness, and he, a one-man power system with dreams of 
his own, wants the colonel out of the way as much as 
anyone. Eddie Pensiero, with the blues flooding his shak- 
ing muscles, the down, mortal blues, is holding his scissors 
in a way barbers aren’t supposed to. The points, shudder- 
ing in the electric cone, are aiming downward. Eddie 
Pensiero’s fist tightens around the steel loops his fingers 
have slid out of, The colonel, with a last tilt of his head, 
exposes his jugular, clearly impatient with the— 


O ‘ 

She comes riding into town on a stolen bicycle: a white 
kerchief at her crown, fluttering behind in points, a dis- 
tinguished emissary from a drained and captured land, 
herself full of ancient title, but nothing in the way of usable 
power, not even a fantasy of it. She’s wearing a lean white 
dress, a tennis dress from prewar summers, falling now not 
in knife-edge pleats but softer, more accidental, half-crisp, 
touches of blue in its deeper folds, a dress for changes in 
the weather, a dress to be flowed upon by shadows of 
leaves, by a crumble of brown and sun-yellow moving 
across it and on as she coasts preoccupied but without 
private smiles, under the leafy trees that line the road of 
hard-packed dirt. Her hair is’: wound, in braids, up on her 
head, which she holds not too high nor what used to be 
called “gravely,” but toward (say against) a particular 
future, for the first time since the Casino Hermann Goering 
_..,and she’s not of our moment, our time, at all. 

The outermost sentry peers from his rusty-boned cement 
ruin, and for two full pedal-swings they are both, he and 
Katje, out in the daylight, blending with packed earth, 
rust, blobbing perforations of sunlight cold gold and slick 
as glass, the fresh wind in the trees, Hyperthyroidal Afri- 
can eyes, their irises besieged as early cornflowers by the 


The Counterforce 765 


crowding fields of white... Qoga-booga! Gwine jump on 
dis drum hyah! Tell de res’ ob de trahb back in de village, 
yowzah! ‘ ; 

So, DUMdumdumdum, DUMdumdumdum, O.K., but 
still there’s no room in her demeanor for even curiosity (of 
course weren’t there going to be drums, a chance for 
violence? A snake jumping off of a limb, a very large © 
presence ahead among the thousand bowing treetops, a 
scream inside herself, a leap upward into primal terror, 
surrendering to it and so—she has dreamt—regaining her 
soul, her long-lost self. ..). Nor will she waste more than 
token glances now on the German lawns rushing so deeply 
away into green hazes or hills, the pale limbs of marble 
balusters beside sanitarium walks that curve restlessly, in a 
fever, a stifling, into thickets of penis-budded sprig and 
thorn so old, so without comfort that eyes are drawn, 
seized by the tear-glands and dragged to find, to find at all 
cost, the path that has disappeared so suddenly... or to 
look behind to hold on to some trace of the spa, a corner 
of the Sprudelhof, the highest peak of the white-sugar 
bandstand, something to counteract Pan’s whisper inside 
the dark grove Come in... forget them. Come in here.... 
No. Not Katje. She has been into the groves and thickets. 
She has danced naked and spread her cunt to the horns of 
grove-dwelling beasts. She has left the moon in the soles 
of her feet, taken its tides with the surfaces of her brain. 
Pan was a lousy lover. Today, in public, they have no 
more than nervous glances for each other. 

What does happen now, and this is quite alarming, is 
that out of nowhere suddenly appear a full dancing-chorus 
of Herero men. They are dressed in white sailor suits de- 
signed to show off asses, crotches, slim waists and shapely 
pectorals, and they are carrying a girl all in silver lamé, a 
loud brassy dame after the style of Diamond Lil or Texas 
Guinan. As they set her down, everyone begins to dance 
and sing: 


Pa—ra—nooooiiiia, Pa-ra-noial 

Ain’t it grand ta see, that good-time face, again! 
Pa-ra-noi-ya, boy oh boy, yer 

Just a bit of you-know-what 

From way back when! 

Even Goya, couldn’t draw ya, 


766 GRaVITY’s Ramnsow 1 


Not the way you looked, just kickin’ in that door— - 
Call a lawyer, Paranoia, 
Lemme-awill my ass to you, for-ever-morel 


Then Andreas and Pavel come out in tap shoes (liber- — 
ated from a rather insolent ENSA show that came through 
in July) to do one of those staccato tap-and-sing numbers: 


Pa- ra- noi— (clippety-clippety-clippety cllya,]op! ) 

Pa- ra- noi— (shufflestomp! shufflestomp! shufflestomp! 
[and] el[ya,lop! clickety cl[Ain’t]ick) it grand (clop) _ . 
ta (clop) see (clippyclop) yer good-time face again! ete. 


Well, Katje realizes long before the first 8 bars of all this 
that the brazen blond bombshell is none other than her- 
self: she is doing a dance routine with these black sailors- 
ashore. Having gathered also that she is the allegorical 
figure of Paranoia (a grand old dame, a little wacky but 
pure heart), she must say that she finds the jazzy vulgarity 
of this music a bit distressing. What she had in mind was 
more of an Isadora Duncan routine, classical and full of 
gauzes, and—well, white. What Pirate Prentice briefed her 
on was folklore, politics, Zonal strategies—but not black- 
ness, When that was what she most needed to know about. 
How can she pass now through so much blackness to re- 
deem herself? How can she expect to find Slothrop? among 
such blackness (subvocalizing the word as an old man 
might speak the name of a base public figure, letting it 
gutter out into real blackness: into being spoken no more). 
There is that stubborn, repressive heat to her thoughts. It 
is none of your heavy racist skin-prickling, no, but a feeling 
of.one more burden, along with the scarcity of food in the 
Zone, the chicken-coop, cave or basement lodgings at sun- 
fall, the armed-occupation phobias and skulkings as bad 
as Holland last year, comfortable in here at least, lotos- 
snuggly, but disastrous out in the World of Reality she still 
believes in and will never give up hoping to rejoin some- 
day. All that’s not bad enough, no, now she must also 
endure blackness, Her ignorance of it |'must see her 
through. isa 

With Andreas she is charming, she radiates that sensu- 
ality peculiar to women who are concerned with an absent 
lover’s safety. But then she must see Enzian. Their first — 


The Counterforce 767 


meeting. Each in a way has been loved by Captain Blicero. 
Each had to arrive at some way of making it bearable, just 
bearable, for just long enough, one day by one.... 

“Oberst. I am happy—” her voice breaks. Genuinely. 
Her head inclines across his desk no longer than is neces- 

“sary to thank, to declare her passivity. The hell she’s 
happy. 

He nods, angles his beard at a chair. This, then, is the 
Golden Bitch of Blicero’s last letters from Holland. Enzian 
formed no image of her then, too taken up, too gagged 
with sorrow at what was happening to Weissmann. She 
seemed then only one of the expected forms of horror that 
must be populating his world. But, ethnic when he least 
wants to be, Enzian came after a while to think of her as 
the great Kalahari rock painting of the White Woman, 
white from the waist down, carrying bow and arrows, 
trailed by her black handmaiden through an erratic space, 
stone and deep, figures of all sizes moving to and fro.... 

But here is the true Golden Bitch. He’s surprised at how 
young and slender she is—a paleness as of having begun to 
leak away from this world, likely to vanish entirely at any 
too-reckless grab. She knows her own precarious thinness, 
her leukemia of soul, and she teases with it. You must want 
her, but never indicate it—not by eyes or move—or she 
will clarify, dead gone as smoke above a trail moving into 
the desert, and you'll never have the chance again. 

“You must have seen him more recently than I.” He 

- speaks quietly. She is surprised at his politeness. Disap- 
pointed: she was expecting more force. Her lip has begun 
to lift. “How did he seem?” 

“Alone.” Her brusque and sideways nod. Gazing back at 
him with the best neutrality she can be sure of in the circs. 

‘She means, You were not with him, when he needed you. 

“He was always alone.” 

She understands then that it isn’t timidity, she was 
wrong. It is decency. The man wants to be decent. He leaves 
himself open. (So does she, but only because everything that 
might hurt has long been numbed out. There’s small risk for 
Katje.) But Enzian risks what former lovers risk whenever 
the Beloved is present, in fact or in word: deepest possibili- 
ties for shame, for sense of loss renewed, or humiliation 
and mockery. Shall she mockP Has he made that: too easy— 


\ 
ae 
iets 


768 Gravity's RaiInBow 


and then, turning, counted on her for fair play? Can she be as 
honest as he, without risking too much? “He was dying,” 
she tells him, “he looked very old, I don’t even know if he 
left Holland alive.” 

“He—” and this hesitation may be (a) in consideration 
of her feelings, or (b) for reasons of Schwarzkommando 
security, or (c) both of the above... but then, hell, the 
Principle of Maximizing Risk takes over again: “he got as 
far as the Liineberg Heath. If you didn’t know, you ought 
to.” 

“You've been looking for him.” 

“Yes, So has Slothrop been, though I don’t think Slothrop 
knows that.” 

“Slothrop and I—” she looks around the room, her eyes 
skitter off metal surfaces, papers, facets of salt, cannot 
come to rest anywhere. As if making a desperate surprise 
confession: “Everything is so remote now. I don’t really 
know why they sent me out here. I don’t know any more 
who Slothrop really was. There’s a failure in the light. I 
can’t see. It’s all going away from me,...” 

It isn’t yet time to touch her, but Enzian reaches out gives 
a friendly chin-up tap on the back of her hand, a military 
now-see-here. “There are things to hold to. None of it may 
look real, but some of it is. Really.” 

“Really.” They both start laughing. Hers is weary-Euro- 
pean, slow, head-shaking. Once she would have been 
assessing as she laughed, speaking of edges, deeps, profit 
and loss, H-hours and points of no return—she would 
have been laughing politically, in response to a power- 
predicament, because there might be nothing else to do. 
But now she’s only laughing. As she once laughed with 
Slothrop, back at the Casino Hermann Goering. 

So she’s only been talking with Enzian about:a common 
friend. Is this how the Vacuum feelsP_ _- 

“Slothrop and I” didn’t work too well. Should she have 
said “Blicero and I’P What would suis bee got her into 
with the African? 

“Blicero and I,” he begins softly, pene her over 

- burnished cheekbones, cigarette smolderin sect in his curled 
right hand, “we were only close in certain ways. There were 
doors I did not open. Could not. Around here, I play an 
omniscient. ’'d say don’t give me away, but it wouldn't 


_ The Counterforce AMOS. 


matter. Their minds are made up. I am the Berlin Snoot 
supreme, Oberhauptberlinerschnauze Enzian. I know it all, 
and they don’t trust me. They gossip in a general way 
about me and Blicero, as yarns to be spun—the truth 
wouldn’t change either their distrust or my Unlimited 
Access. They'd only be passing a story along, another 
story. But the truth must mean something to you. 

“The Blicero I loved was a very young man, in love 
with empire, poetry, his own arrogance. Those all must 
have been important to me once, What I am now grew 
from that. A former self is a fool, an insufferable ass, but 
he’s still human, you’d no more turn him out than you'd 
turn out any other kind of cripple, would you?” 

He seems to be asking her for real advice. Are these the 
sort of problems that occupy his time? What about the 
Rocket, the Empty Ones, the perilous infancy of his 
nation? 

“What can Blicero matter to you?” is what she finally 
asks. - 

He doesn’t have to think for long. He has often imagined 
the coming of a Questioner. “At this point, I would take 
you to a balcony. An observation deck. I would show you 
the Raketen-Stadt, Plexiglass maps of the webs we main- 
tain across the Zone. Underground schools, systems for 
distributing food and medicine. ... We would gaze down 
on staffrooms, communications centers, laboratories, clinics. 
I would say—” 

“All this will I give you, if you will but—” 

“Negative. Wrong story. I would say: This is what I 
have become. An estranged figure at a certain elevation 
and distance...” who looks out over the Raketen-Stadt in 
the amber evenings, with washed and darkening cloud 
sheets behind him—“who has lost everything else but this 
vantage. There is no heart, anywhere now, no human 
ao left in which I exist. Do you know what that feels 

ee 

He is a lion, this man, ego-mad—but despite everything, 
Katje likes him. “But if he were still alive—” 

“No way to know. I have letters he wrote after he left 
your city. He was changing. Terribly. You ask what he 
could matter to me. My slender white adventurer, grown 
twenty years sick and old—the last heart in which I might 


= 


770 Gravirty’s Ratnsow 


have been granted some being—was changing, toad to 
prince, prince to fabulous monster. ... ‘If he is alive,’ he 
may have changed by now past our recognition. We could 
have driven under him in the sky today and never seen. 
Whatever happened at the end, he has transcended. Even 
if he’s only dead. He’s gone beyond his pain, his sin— 
driven deep into Their province, into control, synthesis and 
control, further than—” well, he was about to say “we” 
but “I” seems better after all, “I haven’t transcended. I’ve 
only been elevated. That must be as empty as things get: 
it’s worse than being told you won’t have to die by some- 
one you can’t believe in.... 

“Yes he matters to me, very much, He is an old self, a 
dear albatross I cannot let go.” 

“And me?” She gathers that he expects her to sound like 
a woman of the iggos. “And me,” indeed. But she can 
think of no other way offhand to help him, to allow him a 
moment of comfort. ... ; 

“You, poor Katje. Your story is the saddest of all.” She 
looks up to see exactly how his face will be mocking her. 
She is stunned to see tears instead running, running over 
his cheeks. “You've only been set free,” his voice then 
breaking on the last word, his face brushing forward a 
moment into a cage of hands, then uncaging again for a 
try at her own gay waltztime gallows laugh. Oh, no, is he 
about to go goofy on her.too? What she needs right now 
in her life, from some man in her life, is stability, mental 
health and strength of character, Not this. “I told Slothrop 
he was free, too. I tell anybody who might listen. I will tell 
them as I tell you: you are free. You are free... .” 

“How can my story be sadder that that?” Shameless girl, 
she isn’t humoring him, she’s actually flirting with him 
now, any technique her crepe-paper and _ spider-italics 
young ladyhood ever taught her, to keep from having to 
move into his blackness. Understand it isn’t his blackness, — 
but her own—an inadmissible darkness she is making be- 
lieve for the moment is Enzian’s, something beyond even 
the center of Pan’s grove, something not pastoral at all, 
but of the city, a set of ways in which the natural forces 
are turned aside, stepped down, rectified or bled to ground — 
and come out very like the malignant dead: the Qlippoth 
that Weissmann has “transcended,” souls whose journey 


The Counterforce 771 


‘across was so bad that they lost all their kindness back in 
the blue lightning (the long sea-furrows of it rippling), 
and tumed to imbecile killers and jokers, making unintelligi- 
ble honks in the emptiness, sinewed and stripped thin as 
rats—a city-darkness that is her own, a textured darkness 
in which flows go in all directions, and nothing begins, and 
nothing ends, But as time passes things get louder there. 
It is shaking itself into her consciousness. 

“Flirt if-you want,” Enzian now just as smooth as that 
Cary Grant, “but expect to be taken seriously.” Oh, ho. 
Here’s whatcha came for, folks. 

Not necessarily. His bitterness (all properly receipted in 
German archives which may, however, be destroyed now) 
runs too deep for her, really. He must have learned a 
thousand masks (as the City will continue to mask itself 
against invasions we often do not see, whose outcomes we 
never learn, silent and unnoticed revolutions in the ware- 
house districts where the walls are blank, in the lots where 
the weeds grow thick), and this, no doubt, this Suave 
Older Exotic, is one of them. 

“I don’t know what to do.” She gets up in a long, long 
shrug and begins to stalk gracefully in the room. Her old 
style: a girl about 16 who thinks everyone is staring at her. 
Her hair falls like a hood. Her arms often touch. 

“You don’t have to come into this any further than 
locating Slothrop,” he finally gets around to telling her. 
“All you have to do is tag along with us, and wait till he 
shows up again, Why bother yourself with the rest?” 

“Because I feel,” her voice, perhaps by design, very 
small, “that ‘the rest’ is exactly what I ought to be doing. 
I don’t want to get away with some shallow win. I don’t 
just want to—I don’t know, pay him back for the octopus, 
or something, Don’t I have to know why he’s out here, 
what I did to him, for ThemP How can They be stopped? | 
How long can I get away with easy work, cheap exits? 
Shouldn't I be going all the way in?” 


Her masochism [Weissmann wrote from The Hague] is reassurance 
for her. That she can still be hurt, that she is human and can cry 
at pain. Because, often, she will forget. I can only try to guess how 
- terrible that must be. . So, she needs the whip. She raises her 
ass not in surrender, buts in crepe ure your fears of impotence, 
and mine: can it still... will it fail. .. . But of true submission, 


772 Gravity’s RaAInsow 


of letting go the self and passing into the All, there is nothing, 
not with Katje. She is not the victim I would have chosen to end 
this with. Perhaps, before the end, there will be another. Perhaps 
I dream. ... I am not here, am I, to devote myself to her fantasies! 


“You are meant to survive. Yes, probably. No matter 
how painful you want to make it for yourself, still youre 
always going to come through. You're free to choose exactly 
how pleasant each passage will be. Usually it’s given as a 
reward. I won’t ask for what. I’m sorry, but you seem 
really not to know. That’s why your story is saddest of all.” 

“Reward—” she’s getting mad. “It’s a life-sentence. If 
you call that a reward, then what are you calling me?” 

“Nothing political.” 

“You black bastard.” 

“Exactly.” He has allowed her to speak the truth. A clock 
chimes in the stone comer. “We have someone who was 
with Blicero in May. Just before the end. You don’t have 
to—” 

“Come and listen, yes, Oberst. But I will.” 

He rises, crooks her his official and gentlemanly arm, 
smiling sideways and feeling like a clown. Her own smiling 
is upward like mischievous Ophelia just having glimpsed 
the country of the mad and itching now to get away from 
court. 

Feedback, smile-to-smile, adjustments, waverings: what 
it damps out to is we will never know each other. Beam- 
ing, strangers, la-la-la, off to listen to the end of a man we 
both loved and we're strangers at the films, condemned to 
separate rows, aisles, exits, homegoings. 

Far away in another corridor a loud drill-bit strains, 
smokes, just before snapping. Cafeteria trays and steelware 
rattle, an innocent and kind sound behind familiar regions 
of steam, fat at the edge of souring, cigarette smoke, wash- 
water, disinfectant—a cafeteria in the middle of the As 

There are things to hold on to.... 


ne 


You will want cause and effect. All right. Thanatz was 
washed overboard in the same storm that took Slothrop 
from the Anubis. He was rescued by a Polish undertaker | 


The Counterforce 773 


in a rowboat, out in the storm tonight to see if he can get 
struck by lightning. The undertaker is wearing, in hopes it 
will draw electricity, a complicated metal suit, something 
like a deep-sea diver’s, and a Wehrmacht helmet through ~ 
which he has drilled a couple of hundred holes and in- © 
serted nuts, bolts, springs and conductive wands of many 
shapes so that he jingles whenever he nods or shakes his 
head, which is often. He’s a digital companion all right, 
everything gets either a yes or a no, and two-tone checker- 
boards of odd shape and texture indeed bloom in the rainy 
night around him and Thanatz. Ever since reading about 
Benjamin Franklin in an American propaganda leaflet, 
kite, thunder and key, the undertaker has been obsessed 
with this business of getting hit in the head by a lightning 
bolt. All over Europe, it came to him one night in a flash 
(though not the kind he wanted), at this very moment, 
are hundreds, who knows maybe thousands, of people 
walking around, who have been struck by lightning and 
survived. What stories they could telll 

What the leaflet neglected to mention was that Benja- 
min Franklin was also a Mason, and given to cosmic forms 
of practical jokesterism, of which the United States of 
America may well have been one. 

Well, it’s a matter of continuity. Most people’s lives 
have ups and downs that are relatively gradual, a sinuous 
curve with first derivatives at every point. They're the 
ones who never get struck by lightning. No real idea of 
cataclysm at all. But the ones who do get hit experience 
a singular point, a discontinuity in the curve of life—do 
you know what the time rate of change is at a cusp? In- 
finity, that’s what! A-and right across the point, it’s minus 
infinity! How’s that for sudden change, eh? Infinite miles 
per hour changing to the.same speed in reverse, all in the 
gnat’s-ass or red cunt hair at the At. across the point. 
That’s getting hit by lightning, folks. You're way up there 
on the needle-peak of a mountain, and don’t think there 
aren't lammergeiers cruising there in the lurid red altitudes 
around, waiting for a chance to snatch you off. Oh yes. 
They are piloted by bareback dwarves with little plastic - 
masks around their eyes that happen to be shaped just 
like the infinity symbol: 00. Little men with wicked eye- 
brows, pointed ears and bald heads, although some of 


774 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


them are wearing outlandish headgear, not at all the usual 
Robin Hood green fedoras, no these are Carmen Miranda 
hats, for example, bananas, papayas, bunches of grapes, 
pears, pineapples, mangoes, jeepers even watermelons— 
and there are World War I spike-top Wilhelmets, and baby 
bonnets and crosswise Napoleon hats with and without Ns 
on them, not to mention little red suits and green capes, 
well here they are leaning forward into their cruel birds’ 
ears, whispering like jockeys, out to nab you, buster, just 
like that sacrificial ape off of the Empire State Building, 
except that they won’t let you fall, theyll carry you away, 
to the places they are agents of. It will look like the world 
you left, but it'll be different. Between congruent and 
identical there seems’ to be another class of look-alike that 
only finds the lightning-heads. Another world laid down on 
the previous one and to all appearances no different. 
Ha-ha! But the lightning-struck know, all right! Even if 
they may not know they know. And that’s what this under- 
taker tonight has set out into the storm to find. 

Is he interested in all those other worlds who send their 
dwarf reps out on the backs of eaglesP Nope. Nor does he 
want to write a classic of anthropology, with the lightning- 
struck grouped into a subculture, even secretly organized, 
handshakes with sharp cusp-flicks of fingernails, private 
monthly magazine A Nickel Saved (which looks perfectly 
innocent, old Ben Franklin after inflation, unless you know 
the other half of the proverb: “.. . is a stockpile of nickel.” 
Making the real quote nickel-magnate Mark Hanna’s: 
“You have been in politics long enough to know that no 
man in public owes the public anything.” So the real title 
is Long Enough, which Those Who Know, know. The text 
of each issue of the magazine, when transformed this way, 
yields many interesting messages). To outsiders it’s just a 
pleasant little club newsletter—Jed Plunkitt held a bar- 
becue for the Iowa Chapter the last weekend in April. 
Heard about the Amperage Contest, Jed. Tough luck! But 
come next Barbecue, you’ll be back good as new.... 
Minnie Calkins (Chapter 1.793) got married Easter Sun-— 
day to a screen-door salesman from California. Sorry to say 
he’s not eligible for Membership—at least not yet. But 

with all those screen doors around, well sure keep our 
fingers crossed! ... Your Editor has been receiving many, 


The Counterforce 775 


many “Wha hoppen?”’s concerning the Spring Convention 
in Decatur when all the lights failed during the blessing. 
Glad to report now that trouble was traced finally to a 
giant transient in the line, “Kind of an electrical tidal 
wave,” sez Hank Faffner, our engineer-on-the-scene. “Every 
bulb in the place burned out, a ceilingful of sooty, sterile 
eggs.” Quite a poet, Hank! Now if you can only find out 
where that spike came from— 

But does the Polish undertaker in the rowboat care 
about busting this code, about secret. organizations or 
recognizable subcultures? No, he doesn’t. The reason he is 
seeking these people out is that he thinks it will help him 
in his job. Can you dig that, gates? He wants to know how 
people behave before and after lightning bolts, so he'll 
know better how to handle bereaved families. 

“You are perverting a great discovery to the uses of 
commerce,” sez Thanatz, stepping ashore. “You ought to 
be ashamed of yourself.” He is no more than five minutes 
into the empty town at the edge of the marsh when nockle 
KKAHH-UHNN! nocklenockle nockle an enormous blast 
of light and sound hits the water back where the under- 
taker, peeved. at what he takes to be no gratitude, is haul- 
ing away. 

“Oh,” comes his faint voice-“Oh, ho. Oh-ho-ho-ho!” - 

“Nobody lives here but us.” A solid figure, a whispering 
silhouette, charcoal-colored, has materialized in Thanatz’s 
path. “We do not harm visitors. But it would be. better if 
you took another way.” 

They are 175s—homosexual prison-camp inmates. They 
have come north from the Dora camp at. Nordhausen, 
north till the land ended, and have set up an all-male 
community between this marsh and the Oder estuary. 
Ordinarily, this would be Thanatz’s notion of paradise, 
except that none of the men can bear to be out of Dora— 
Dora was home, and they are homesick. Their “liberation” 
was a banishment. So here in a new location they have 
made up a hypothetical SS chain of command—no longer 
restricted to what Destiny allotted then for jailers, they 
have now managed to come up with some really mean ass 
imaginary Nazi playmates, Schutzhaftlingsfiihrer to Block- 
fiihrer, and chosen an internal hierarchy for themselves 
too: Lager and Blockaltester, Kapo, Vorarbeiter, Stuben- 


776 Gravity’s RAINBOW , 


dienst, Laufer (who is a runner or messenger, but also 


happens to be the German name for a chess bishop... if 
you have seen him, running across the wet meadows in 
very early morning, with his red vestments furling and 
fluttering darkened almost to tree-bark color among the 
watery downs, you will have some notion of his real pur- 
pose here inside the community—he is carrier of holy 
strategies, memoranda of conscience, and when he ap- 
proaches over the reedy flats of morning you are taken 
by your bowed nape and brushed with the sidebands of a 
Great Moment—for the Laufer is the most sacred here, it 
is he who takes messages out to the ruinous interface be- 
tween the visible Lager and the invisible SS). 


At the top of the complex is Schutzhaftlingsfihrer Bli- — 


cero. The name has found it way this far east, as if carry- 
ing on the man’s retreat for him, past the last stand in the 
Liineburg Heath. He is the Zone’s worst specter. He is 
malignant, he pervades the lengthening summer nights. 
Like a cankered root he is changing, growing toward 
winter, growing whiter, toward the idleness and the 


famine. Who else could the 175s have chosen for their — 


very highest oppressor? His power is absolute. And don’t 
think he isn’t really waiting, out by the shelled and rusty 


gasworks, under the winding staircases, behind the tanks — 


and towers, waiting for the dawn’s first carmine-skirted 
runner with news of how the night went. The night is his 
dearest interest,so he must be told. 


This phantom SS command here is based not so much 


on the one the prisoners knew at Dora as on what they 


inferred to be the Rocket-structure next door at the Mittel- — 


werke. The A4, in its way, was also concealed behind an 


uncrossable wall that separated real pain and terror from — 


summoned deliverer. Weissmann/Blicero’s presence 


crossed the wall, warping, shivering into the fetid 


bunkrooms, with the same reach toward another shape as 
words trying to make their way through dreams. What the 


175s heard from their real SS guards there’ was enough to — 
elevate Weissmann on the spot—they, his own brother- — 
elite, didn’t know what this man was up to. When prison- — 
ers came in earshot, the guards stopped whispering. But 
their fear kept echoing: fear not of Weissmann personally, — 


but of the time itself, a time so desperate that he could 


: 


-The Counterforce 777 


now move through the Mittelwerke as if he owned it, a 
time which was granting him a power different from that 
of Auschwitz or Buchenwald, a power they couldn’t have 
borne themselves... . | 

On hearing the name of Blicero now, Thanatz’s asshole 
tightens a notch. Not that he thinks the name was planted 
here or anything. Paranoia is not a major problem for 
Thanatz., What does bother him is being reminded at all— 
reminded that he’s had no word, since the noon on the 
Heath when ooo00 was fired, of Blicero’s status—alive or 
dead, powerlord or fugitive. He isn’t sure which he pre- 
fers. As long as the Anubis kept moving, there was no 
need to choose: the memory would have been left so far 
behind that one day its “reality” wouldn’t matter any more, 
Of course it happened. Of course it didn’t happen. 

“We think he’s out there,” the town spokesman is telling 
Thanatz, “alive and on the run. Now and then we hear 
something—it could fit Blicero easily enough. So we wait. 
He will find us. He has a prefabricated power base here, 
waiting for him.” 

“What if he doesn’t stay?” pure meanness, “what if he 
laughs at you, and passes by?” 

“Then I can’t explain,” the other beginning to step back- 
ward, back out into the rain, “it’s a matter of faith.” 

Thanatz, who has sworn that he will never seek out 
Blicero again, not after the ooo00, feels the flat of terror’s 
blade. “Who is your runner?” he cries. 

“Go yourself,” a filtered whisper. 

“Wher ep” Ne 

“The gasworks,” 

“But I have a message for—” 

“Take it yourself... .” 

The white Anubis, gone on to salvation. Back here, in 
her wake, are the preterite, swimming and drowning, 
mired and afoot, poor passengers at sundown who've lost 
the way, blundering across one another’s flotsam, the 
scrapings, the dreary junking of memories—all they have 
to hold to—churning, mixing, rising, falling. Men over- 
board and our common debris. ... 

_ Thanatz remains shaking and furious in the well-estab- 
lished rain, under the sandstone arcade. I should have 
sailed on, he wants to scream, and presently does. “I 


778 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


wasn’t supposed to be left with you discards... .” Where’s — 
the court of appeals that will hear his sad story? “I lost my 
footing!” Some mess cook slipped in a puddle of elite 
vomit and spilled a whole galvanized can full of creamed 
yellow chicken nausea all over that starboard weather 
deck, Thanatz didn’t see it, he was looking for Margherita, 
... Too bad, les jeux sont faits, nobody’s listening and the 
Anubis is gone. Better here with the swimming debris, 
Thanatz, no telling what'll come sunfishing by, ask that 
Oberst Enzian, he knows (there is a key, among the 
wastes of the World... and it won’t be found on board 
the white Anubis because they throw everything of value 
over the side). 

So—Thanatz is out by the gasworks, up against a tar 
wall, mackerel eyes bulging out of wet cool collar-shadows, 
all black and white, really scared, breath smoking out 
comers of his mouth as green dawn begins to grow back 
among the gassen. He won’t be here, he’s only dead only 
dead? Isn’t this an “interface” here? a meeting surface for 

.two worlds... sure, but which twoP There’s no counting 
on any positivism to save him, that didn’t even work ied 
in Berlin, before the War, at Peter Sachsa’s sittings. . 

only got in the way, made others impatient with hia. ‘A 
screen of words between himself and the numinous was 
always just a tactic... it never let him feel any freer. 
These days there’s even less point to it. He knows Blicero 
exists. 

It wasn’t a dream. Don’t you wish it could be. Another 
fever that sooner or later will break, releasing you into the 
cool reality of a room... you don’t have to perform that 
long and complicated mission after all, no, you see it was 
only the fever... it wasn’t real.... 

This time it is real, Blicero, alive or dead, is real. 
Thanatz, a little crazy now with fear, wants to go provoke 
him, he can’t wait any more, he has to see what it will take 

to get Blicero across the interface. What screaming ass- 
wiggling surrender might bring him back. . 

All it brings is the Russian police. There’s a working 
agreement about staying inside the limits of the 175-Stadt 
that of course no one told Thanatz about! The gasworks 
used to be a notorious hustling spot till the Russians made 
a series of mass busts. A last fading echo of the 175-Stadt 


The Counterforce 779 


Chorale goes skipping away down the road singing some 
horrible salute to faggotry such as 


Yumsy-numsy ’n’ poopsie-poo, 
If I’m a degenerate, so are yOu. oo 


“Nowadays all we get are you tourists,” sez the natty 
civilian with the white handkerchief in his breast-pocket, 
snickering in the shadow of his hat brim. “And, of course, 
the odd spy.” 

“Not me,” Thanatz sez. 

“Not you, eh? Tell me about it.” 

Something of a quandary, all right. In less than half a 
day, Thanatz has moved from no need to worry or even 
think about Blicero, to always needing some formulation of 
him at hand to please any stray curious cop. This is one 
of his earlier lessons in being preterite: he won't escape 
any of the consequences he sets up for himself now, not 
unless it’s by accident. 

For example, at the outskirts of Stettin, by accident, a 
Polish guerrilla group, just arrived back from London, 
mistakes the police car for one transporting an anti-Lublin 
journalist to prison, shoots out the tires, roars in, kills the 
driver, wounds the civilian interrogator, and escapes 
lugging Thanatz like a sack of potatoes. 

“Not me,” Thanatz sez. 

“Shit. He’s right.” 

They roll him out of the car door into a DP encamp- 
ment a few miles farther on. He is herded into a wire 
enclosure along with 1,999 others being sent west to 
Berlin. - 

For weeks he rides the freights, hanging in shifts to the 
outside of his assigned car while inside someone else sleeps 
on the straw space he vacated. Later they change places. 
It helps to stay awake. Every day Thanatz sees half a 
dozen DPs go on the nod and fall off the train, and some- 
times it’s funny to watch, but too often it’s not, though 
DP humor is a very dependent thing. He is rubber- 
stamped on hands, forehead, and ass, deloused, poked, 
palpated, named, numbered, consigned, invoiced, mis- 
routed, detained, ignored. He passes in and out the paper 
grasp of Russian, British, American and French body-job- 


780 GrRaviry’s Rarsow 


bers, round and round the occupation circuit, getting to 
recognize faces, coughs, pairs of boots on new owners. 
Without a ration card or Soldbuch, you are doomed to 
be moved, in lots of 2,000, center to center, about the 
Zone, possibly forever. So, out among the ponds and fence- 
posts of Mecklenburg somewhere, Thanatz discovers that 
he is exempt from nothing. His second night on the rails 
his shoes are stolen. He comes down with a deep 
bronchial cough and a high fever, For a week no one 
comes to look at him. For two aspirins he has to suck 
off the orderly in charge, who has grown to enjoy rough- 
bearded cheeks flaming at 103° against his thighs, the 
furnace breath under his balls. In Mecklenburg Thanatz 
steals a cigarette butt from a sleeping one-armed veteran, 
and is beaten and kicked for half an hour by people whose 
language he has never heard before, whose faces he never 
gets a look at. Bugs crawl over him only slightly irritated 
that he’s in their way. His daily bread is taken away by 
another DP smaller than he is, but with the look of some 
right to it, a look Thanatz at best can only impersonate— 
and he’s afraid to go after the little rag-coated liver- 
colored back, the munching haystack head... and others 
are watching: the woman who tells everyone’ that Thanatz 
molests her little girl at night (Thanatz can never meet 
her eyes because yes he wants to, pull down the slender 
pretty pubescent’s oversize GI trousers stuff penis between 
pale little buttocks reminding him so of Bianca take bites 
of soft-as-bread insides of thighs pull long hair throatback 
Bianca make her moan move her head how she loves it) 
and a beetlebrowed Slav too, who has forced Thanatz to 
go hunting cigarette butts for him after lights out, to give 
up his sleep not so much to the chance of finding a real 
butt as to the Slav’s right to demand it—the Slav is watch- 
ing too—in fact, a circle of enemies have all observed 
the taking of the bread and Thanatz’s failure to go after 
it. Their judgment is clear, a clarity in their eyes Thanatz 
never saw back on the Anubis, an honesty he can’t avoid, 
cart't shrug off... finally, finally he has to face, literally 
- with his own real face, the pare ei 49 the bs light 
of. 

Little by little his memory of that last pockets on 
the Heath grows clearer. The fevers fire-polish, the pain 


The Counterforce 781 


removes impurities. An image keeps recurring—a muddy 
brown almost black eyeball reflecting a windmill and a 
jagged reticule of tree-branches in silhouette... doors at 
the sides of the windmill open and shut quickly, like loose 
shutters in a storm... in the iris sky one cloud, the shape 
of a clamshell, rises very purple around the edges, the 
puff from an explosion, something light ocher at the hori-. 
zon... closer in it seems snarling purple around a yellow 
that’s brightening, intestines of yellow shadowed in violet 
spilling outward, outward in a bellying curve toward us. 
There are, oddly (not to cut this picturesque scene off, 
but) oddly enough, get this, no windmills on the Liine- 
burg Heath! Thanatz even checked around real fast just 
to make sure, nope, no windmills, O.K., so, how come Bli- 
cero’s eye, looking out on the Heath, is reflecting a wind- 
mill, huh? Well, to be honest, now it isn’t reflecting a 
windmill, it’s reflecting a bottle of gin. No bottle of gin 
out here on the Heath either. But it was reflecting a wind- 
mill. What’s this? Could it be that Blicero’s eyes, in which 
Greta Erdmann saw maps of his Kingdom, are for Thanatz 
reflecting the past? That would be strange. Whatever went 
on on those eyeballs when you weren’t looking would just 
be lost. You’d only have fragments, now and then. Katje, 
looking back over her shoulder at fresh whip-marks. Gott- 
fried in the morning lineup, body all over Wandervogel- 
limp, wind blowing his uniform in great ripples back 
from the bough-curves of his thighs, hair flying in the 
wind, saucy sideways smile, mouth a little open, jaw for- 
ward, eyelids down. Blicero’s own reflection in the oval 
mirror, an old face—he is about to don a wig, a Dragon 
Lady pageboy with bangs, and he pauses, looking in, face 
asking what? what did you say? wig held ‘to the side and 
slightly lower so as to be another face in heavy wig-shad- 
ows nearly invisible... but looking closer you can see 
bone-ridges and fat-fields begin to emerge now, an ice- 
glaze white bobbing, a mask hand-held, over the shadows 
in the hollow hood-space—two faces looking back now, 
and Thanatz, are you going to judge this man? Thanatz, 
haven’t you loved the whip? Haven’t you longed for the 


brush and sigh of ladies’ clothes? Haven’t you wanted to 


murder a child you loved, joyfully kill something so help- 
Jess and innocent? As he looks up at you, at the last pos- 


782 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


sible minute, trusting you, and smiles, purses his lips to 
make a kiss just as the blow falls across his skull... isn’t 
that best of all? The cry that breaks in your chest then, 
the sudden, solid arrival of loss, loss forever, the irreversi- 
ble end of love, of hope...no denying what you finally 

. (but so much fear at taking it in, the serpent face 
—at opening your arms and legs and letting it enter you, 
into your true face it'll kill you if it—) 

He is telling the Schwarzkommando this now, all this 
and more. After a week of shouting I know, of crying I've 
seen the Schwarzgerdét whenever a black face appears 
behind the flowing wire fences, at the cinderbanks or the 
crossings, word has got around. One day they come for 
him: he is lifted from the straw as black with coal-dust as 
they—lifted easy as an infant, a roach flicked in kindness 
off of his face—and transported shivering, gathered moan- 
ing south to the Erdschweinhéhle where now they are all 
sitting around a fire, smoking and munching, eyes riveted 
on blue Thanatz, who has been gabbing for seven hours 
nonstop. He is the only one privileged, in a way, to tell 
ee! much of the story, he’s the fella who lost out, the 
oser, 


Just a fool-who-never-wins, at love, 

Though-he-plays, most-ev’, ry night... 

A loser-to-the-Ones, Above, 

Who stack-the-cards, of wrong, and right... . 

Oh the loser never bets-it-all, and-he never-plays, 
to win, 

He knows if-once, you don’t-succeed, you can al-ways 
lose-again| 

Just'a loser at-the-game, of love... — 

Spending night after night a-lo-o-o-onel 


He lost Gottfried, he lost Bianca, and he is only beginning, 
this late into it, to see that they are the same loss, to the 
same winner. By now he’s forgotten the sequence in time. 
Doesn’t know which child he lost een even—hornet 
clouds of memory welling up—even if they aren’t two 
names, different names, for the same child... . but then in 
the crash of others’ flotsam, sharp edges, and high-spin 
velocities you understand, he finds he can’t hold on to this 
thought for long: soon he’s floundering in the open 


The Counterforce 783 


again. But he'll remember that he held it for a little, saw 
its texture and color, felt it against the side of his face 
as he woke from a space of sleeping near it—that the two _ 
children, Gottfried and Bianca, are the same.... 

He lost Blicero, but it wasn’t quite as real. After the last 
firing, the unremembered night-hours to Hamburg, the 
hop from Hamburg to Bydgoszcz in a purloined P-51 
Mustang was so clearly Procalowski-down-out-of-the-sky- 
in-a-machine, that Thanatz came to imagine he had dis- 
_ posed of Blicero too only in that same very conditional, 
metallic way. And sure enough, the metal has given way 
to flesh, and sweat, and long chattering night encounters, 
Blicero cross-legged stammering down at his crotch I 
cuh-cuh-cuh-cuh— “Can't,” Blicero? “Couldn’t”? “Care”? 
“Cry”? Blicero that night was offering all his weapons, laying 
down all maps of his revetments and labyrinths. 

Thanatz was really asking: when mortal faces go by, 
sure, self-consistent and never seeing me, are they real? 
Are they souls, really? or only attractive sculpture, the 
sunlit faces of clouds? 

And: “How can I love them?” 

But there’s no answer from Blicero. His eyes go casting 
runes with the windmill silhouettes. A number of con- 
tributed scenes do now flash by for Thanatz. From Ensign 
Morituri, a banana-leaf floor somewhere near Malabacat 
in the Philippines, late *44, a baby squirms, rolls, kicks in 
drops of sunlight, raising dust off the drying leaves, and 
the special-attack units roar away overhead, Zeros bearing 
comrades away, finally as fallen cherry-blossoms—that fa- 
vorite Kamikaze image—in the spring . . . from Greta Erd- 
mann, a world below the surface of Earth or mud—it © 
crawls like mud, but cries like Earth, with layer-pressed 
generations of gravities and losses thereto—losses, failures, 
last moments followed by voids stringing back, a series of 
hermetic caves caught in the suffocated layers, those for- 
ever lost... from someone, who'll ever know who? a flash 
of Bianca in a thin cotton shift, one arm back, the smooth 
powdery hollow under the arm and the leaping bow of 
"one small breast, her lowered face, all but forehead and 

cheekbone in shadow, turning this way, the lashes now 
whose lifting you pray for...will she see you? a sus- 


784 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


pension forever at the hinge of doubt, this perpetuate 
doubting of her love— . 

They'll help him through it. The Erdschweinhdhlers 
will sit up all night with this nonstop intelligence briefing. 
He is the angel they've hoped for, and it’s logical he 
should come now, on the day when they have their Rocket 
all assembled at last, their single A4 scavenged all summer 
piece by piece clear across the Zone from Poland to the 
Low Countries. Whether you believed or not, Empty or 
Green, cunt-crazy or politically celibate, power-playing or 
neutral, you had a feeling—a suspicion, a latent wish, 
some hidden tithe out of your soul, something—for the 
Rocket. It is that “something” that the Angel Thanatz 
now illuminates, each in a different way, for everybody 
listening, 

By the time he’s done, they will all know what the 
Schwarzgerat was, how it was used, where the 00000 was 
fired from, and which way it was pointed. Enzian will 
smile grimly, and groan to his feet, the decision already 
made for him hours ago, and say, “Well, let’s have a look 
at the timetables now.” Erdschweinhohle rival, Empty One 
Josef Ombindi, grips him by the forearm—‘If there’s any- 
thing...” Enzian nods. “See if you can work us out a 
tight security watch, ’kurandye.” He hasn’t called Ombindi 
that for a while. Nor is it a small concession to give the 
Empty Ones control of the watch lists, at least for the 
duration of this journey... 

... which has already begun, as one and a half levels 
below, men and women are busy with tackle, lines, and 
harness easing rocket sections each onto its dolly, more 
Schwarzkommando waiting in leather and blueflowered 
files up the ramps to the outside, along the present and 
future vectors strung between wood rails and grooves, 
Empty, Neutral and Green all together now, waiting or 
hauling or supervising, some talking for the first time since 
the dividing along lines of racial life and racial death 
began, how many years ago, reconciled for aa in the only | 
Event that could have brought them together (I couldn't, 
Enzian knows, and shudders at what’s 1s to happen 
after it’s over—but maybe it’s only meant |to last its frac- 
tion of a day, and why can’t that be enough? try to let it 
be enough...). aN i 


The Counterforce~ | 785 


Christian comes past, downhill adjusting a web belt, 
not quite swaggering—night before last his sister Maria 
visited him in a dream to tell him she wished no revenge 
against anyone, and wanted him to trust and love the 
Neuarorerue—so their eyes now meet not quite amused. 
nor quite yet in a challenge, but knowing more together 
than they ever have so far, and Christian’s hand at the 
moment of passing cocks out half in salute, half in cele- 
bration, aimed toward the Heath, northwesterly, Kingdom- 
of-Deathward, and Enzian’s goes out the same way, iya, 
*kurandyel! as, at some point, the two palms do slide and 
brush, do touch, and it is touch and trust enough, for this 
moment.... 


O 


Unexpectedly, this country is pleasant, yes, once inside it, 
quite pleasant after all. Even though there is a villain 
here, serious as death. It is. this typical American teen- 
ager’s own Father, trying episode after episode to kill 
his son. And the kid knows it. Imagine that. So far he’s 
managed to escape his father’s daily little death-plots— 
but nobody has said he has to keep escaping. 

He’s a cheerful and a plucky enough lad, and doesn’t hold 
any of this against his father particularly. That ol’ Broder- 
ick’s just a murderin’ fool, golly what'll he come up with 
next— 

It’s a giant factory-state here, a City of the Future full 
of extrapolated 1930s swoop-facaded and balconied sky- 
scrapers, lean chrome caryatids with bobbed hairdos, 

classy airships of all descriptions drifting in the boom and 
hush of the city abysses, golden lovelies sunning in roof- 
gardens and turning to wave to you as you pass. It is 
the Raketen-Stadt. 

Down below, thousands of kids are running in windy 
courtyards and areaways, up and down flights of steps, 

_skulleaps on their heads with plastic propellers spinning 
_ in the wind rattling and blurred, kids running messages 
among the plastic herbage in and out of the different soft- 

plastic offices—Here’s a memo for you Tyrone, go and find 
the Radiant Hour (Weepers! Didn’t know it was lostl 


SN 
et ee 

o 

‘eet 
zi a 
i an 


786 Graviry’s RaInsow 


Sounds like ol’ Pop’s up to somma those tricks again!), so 
it’s out into the swarming corridors, full of larking dogs, 
bicycles, pretty subdeb secretaries on roller skates, prod- 
uce carts, beanies whirling forever in the lights, cap-gun 
or water-pistol duels at each corner, kids dodging behind 
the sparkling fountains WAIT that’s a real gun, this is a 
real bullet zinnnggg! good try, Pop, but you're not quite 
as keen as The Kid today] 

Onward to rescue the Radiant Hour, which has been 
abstracted from the day’s 24 by colleagues of the Father, 
for sinister reasons of their own. Travel here gets com- 
plicated—a system of buildings that move, by right angles, 
along the grooves of the Raketen-Stadt’s street-grid. You 
can also raise or lower the building itself, a dozen floors 
per second, to desired heights or levels underground, like 
a submarine skipper with his periscope—although certain 
paths aren’t available to you. They are available to others, 
but not to you. Chess. Your objective is not the King— 
there is no King—but momentary targets such as the 
Radiant Hour. 

Bing in pops a kid with beanie spinning, hands Slothrop 
another message and spins off again. “The Radiant Hour 
is being held captive, if you want to see her on display to 
all interested customers be present at this address 11:30 
a.m.”—in the sky a white clockface drifts conveniently 
by, hmm only half an hour to gather together my rescue 
team. Rescue team will consist of Myrtle Miraculous flyin’ 
in here in a shoulderpadded maroon dress, the curlers still 
up in her hair and a tough frown fer draggin’ her outa 
Slumberland... next a Negro in a pearl-gray zoot and 
Inverness cape name of Maximilian, high square pomaded 
head and a superthin mustache come zooming here out 
of his “front” job, suave manager of the Club Oogabooga 
where Beacon Street aristocracy rubs elbows evry night 
with Roxbury winos ’n’ dopefiends, yeah hi Tyrone, heah 
Ah is! H’lo Moitle baby, hyeah, hyeah, hyeah! Whut’s de 
big rush, mah man? Adjusting his carmation, lookin’ round 
th’ room, everybody’s here now except for that Mar-cel 
but hark the familiar music-box theme yes it’s that old- 
' timery sweet Stephen: Foster music and sure enough in 
through the balcony window now comes Marcel, a me- 
chanical chess-player dating back to the Second Empire, 


The Counterforce 787 


actually built a century ago for the great conjuror Robert- 
Houdin, very serious-looking French refugee kid, funny 
haircut with the ears perfectly outlined in hair that starts _ 
abruptly a quarter-inch strip of bare plastic skin away, 
black patent-shiny hair, hornrim glasses, a rather remote 
manner, unfortunately much too literal with humans (imag- 
ine what happened the first time Maximilian come hi-de- 
hoing in the door with one finger jivin’ in the air sees 
metal-ebonite-and-plastic young Marcel sitting there and 
say, “Hey man gimme some skin, man!” well not only does 
Marcel give him a heavy time about skin, skin in all its 
implications, oh no that’s only at the superficial level, next | 
we get a long discourse on the concept of “give,” that goes 
on for a while, then, then he starts in on “Man.” That’s 
really an exhaustive one. In fact Marcel isn’t anywhere 
near finished with it yet). Still, his exquisite 19th-century 
brainwork—the human art it took to build which has been 
flat lost, lost as the dodo bird—has stood the Floundering 
Four in good stead on many, many go-rounds with the © 
Paternal Peril. 
But where inside Marcel is the midget Grandmaster, 
the little Johann Allgeier? where’s the pantograph, and 
the magnets? Nowhere. Marcel really is a mechanical 
chessplayer. No fakery inside to give him any touch of — 
humanity at all. Each of the FF is, in fact, gifted while 
at the same time flawed by his gift—unfit by it for human 
living. Myrtle Miraculous specializes in performing mira- 
cles. Stupendous feats, impossible for humans. She has 
lost respect for humans, they are clumsy, they fail, she 
‘does want to love them but love is the only miracle that’s 
‘beyond her. Love is denied her forever. The others of 
cher class are either homosexuals, fanatics about law ‘n’ 
order, off on strange religious excursions, or as intolerant 
of failure as herself, and though friends such as Mary 
Marvel and Wonder Woman keep inviting her to parties 
to meet eligible men, Myrtle knows it’s no use.... As for 
Maximilian, he has a natural sense of rhythm, which 
‘means all rhythms, up to and including the cosmic. So he 
‘will never be where the fathomless manhole awaits, where 
‘the safe falls from the high window shrieking like a bomb 
—he is a pilot through Earth’s baddest minefields, if we 
‘only stay close to him, be where he is as much as we 


i 
AG 


788 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


can—yet Maximilian’s doom is never to go any further into 
danger than its dapperness, its skin-exciting first feel.... 

Fine crew this is, getting set to go off after the Radiant 
—say what? what’s Slothrop’s own gift and Fatal Flaw? 
Aw, c’mon—uh, the Radiant Hour, collecting their equip- 
eae Myrtle zooming to and fro materializing this and 
that: 

The Golden Gate Bridge (“How about that one?” “Uh, 
let’s see the other one, again? with the, you know, uh...” 
“The Brooklyn?” “—kind of old-fashioned looking—” “Th 
Brooklyn Bridge?” “Yeah, that’s it, with the pointed... 
whatever they are...”). 

The Brooklyn Bridge (“See, for a chase-scene, Myrtle, 
we ought to observe proportions—” “Do tell.” “Now if we 
were gonna be in high-speed automobiles, well, sure, we 
might use the Golden Gate... but for zooming through 
the air now, we need something older, more intimate, 
human—’). 

A pair of superlatively elegant Rolls Royces (“Quit 
fooling, Myrtle, we already agreed, didn’t we? No auto- 
mobiles ...”). 

A small plastic baby’s steering wheel (“Aw all right, I 
know you don’t respect me as a leader but listen can’t 
we be reasonable ...”). 

Any wonder it’s hard to feel much confidence in these 
idiots as they go up against Pernicious Pop each day? 
There’s no real direction here, neither lines of power nor 
cooperation. Decisions are never really made—at best they 
manage to emerge, from a chaos of peeves, whims, hallu- 
cinations and all-round assholery. This is less a fighting 
team than nest full of snits, blues, crotchets and grudges, 
not a rare or fabled bird in the lot. Its survival seems, 
after all, only a mutter of blind fortune groping through 
the heavy marbling of skies one Titanic-Night at a time. 
Which is why Slothrop now observes his coalition with 
hopes for success and hopes for disaster about equally 
high (and no, that doesn’t cancel out to apathy—it makes 
a loud dissonance that dovetails inside you sharp as 
knives). It does annoy him that he can be so divided, so 
perfectly unable to come down on one side or another, 
Those whom the old Puritan sermons denounced as “the 
glozing neuters of the world” have no easy road to haul 


The Counterforce 789 


down, Wear-the-Pantsers, just cause you can’t see it doesn’t 
mean it’s not there! Energy inside is just as real, just as 
binding and inescapable, as energy that shows. When’s 
the last time you felt intensely lukewarm? eh? Glozing 
neuters are just as human as heroes and villains. In many 
ways they have the most grief to put up with, don’t they? 
Why don’t you, right now, wherever you are, city folks 
or out in the country, snuggled in quilts or riding the bus, 
just turn to the Glozing Neuter nearest you, even your own 
reflection in the mirror, and... just... sing, 


How-dy neighbor, how-dy pardl 
Ain’t it lone-ly, say ain’t it hard, 
Passin’ by so silent, day-after-day, with-out, even 
a smile-or, a friendly word to say? Oh, let me 
Tell ya bud-dy, tell ya ace, 
Things’re fal-lin’, on their face— 
Maybe we should stick together part o’ the way, and 
Skies’ll be bright-er some day] 
Now ev rybody— 


As the 4 suit up, voices continue singing for a while, 
depending how much each one happens to care—Myrtle 
displaying generous expanses of nifty gam, and Maximilian 
leering up beneath the fast-talking young tomato’s skirts, 
drawing bewildered giggles from adolescent Marcel, who 
may be a bit repressed. 

“Now,” Slothrop with a boobish, eager-to-please smile, 


“time for that Pause that Refreshes!” And he’s into the 
- icebox before Myrtle’s “Oh, Jesus” has quite finished echo- 


f 


ing...the light from the cold wee bulb turning his face 
to summerlight blue, Broderick and Nalline’s shadow- 
child, their unconfessed, their monster son, who was born 
with hydraulic clamps for hands that know only how to 
reach and grab... and a heart that gurgles audibly, like” 
a funny fatman’s stomach... but look how lost, how un- 
arrested his face is, was, that 114 seconds in the glow 


from the folksy old icebox humming along in Kelvinator- 


Bostonian dialect, “Why cummawn in, T’rone, it’s nice 


and friendly heeah in my stummick, gawt lawtsa nice 
"things, like Mawxies, ’n’ big Baby Rooths....” Walking 
now in among miles-down-the-sky shelves and food-moun- 
tains or food-cities of Iceboxland (but look out, it can get 


790 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


pretty Fascist in here, behind the candy-colored sweet 
stuff is thermodynamic elitism at its clearest—bulbs can 
be replaced with candles and the radios fall silent, but the 
Grid’s big function in this System is iceboxery: freezing 
back the tumultuous cycles of the day to preserve this 
odorless small world, this cube of changelessness), climb- 
ing over the celery ridges where the lettered cheese glasses 
loom high and glossy in the middle distance, slippin’ on 
the butter dish, piggin’ on the watermelon down to the 
rind, feelin’ yellow and bright as you skirt the bananas, 
gazing down at verdigris reaches of mold across the 
crusted terrain of an old, no longer identifiable casserole 
—bananas! who-who’s been putting bananas— 


In-the-re-frig er a-torl 
O no-no-no, no-no-nol 


Chiquita Banana sez we shouldn’t! Somethin’ awful’ll hap- 
pen! Who would do that? It couldn’t be Mom, and 
Hogan’s in love with Chiquita Banana, Tyrone’s come in 
the room plenty of times found his brother with banana 
label glued on his erect cock for ready reference, lost in 
masturbatory fantasies of nailing this cute but older Latin 
lady while she’s wearing her hat, gigantic fruit-market hat 
and a big saucy smile |Ay, ay, how passionate you 
Yankees are! ...a-and it couldn’t’ve been Pop, no Pop 
wouldn’t, but if it (is it getting cold in hereP) wasn’t any 
of us, then (what’s happening to the Spike Jones record 
of “Right in the Fithrer’s Face” playing back out in the 
living room, why’s the sound fading?) ... unless I did it 
without knowing (look around, something's squeaking on 
its hinges) and maybe that means I’m going crazy (what’s 
this brightening the bulblight, what’s—) SLAM well who- 
ever it is that’s been wantonly disregarding United Fruit’s 
radio commercials has also just closed young Tyrone in 
that icebox, and now he'll have to count on Myrtle to get 
him out. Embarrassing as heck, 

“Good thinking, boss man.” 

“Gee, M.M., I don’t know what happened... 

“Do you ever? Grab on to my cape. 

Whoosh— 

“Whew. Well,” sez Slothrop, “uh, are we all... ?” 


_ The Counterforce i OE 
“That Radiant Hour’s probably light-years away by — 
now,” sez Myrt, “and you have a snot icicle hanging outa 
your nose.” Marcel springs to the controls of the mobile 
building, keys in to Central Control a request for omni- 
directional top-speed clearance, which sometimes comes 
through and sometimes not, depending on a secret process 
among the granters of permission, a process it is one of 
the 4’s ongoing mandates to discover and impart to the 
world. This time they get Slow Crawl, Suburban Vectors, 
lowest traffic status in the Raketen-Stadt, involved only 
once in recorded history, against a homosexual child- 
murdering Indian liked to wipe off his organ afterwards 
on the Flag and so on—‘Shit!” hollers Maximilian at 
Slothrop, “Slow Crawl, Suburban Vectors! whut th’ fuck 
we s’posed to do man, swim or some shit?” 
“Uh, Myrtle...” Slothrop approaches gold-snooded 
M.M. a little deferent, “uh, do you think you could...” 
Jesus they run through this. same routine every time— 


‘doesn’t Myrtle wish Sniveling Slothrop would cut this 


wishy-washy malarkey ’n’ be a man fer oncel She lights 
a cigarette, lets it droop from one corner of her mouth, 
juts out the opposite hip and sighs, “On the beam,” exas- 
perated already with this creep— 

~ And Los! the miracle is done, they’re now zipping along 
the corridor-streets of the Raketen-Stadt like some long- 
necked sea monster, Little kids boil up like ants on the 
webby arches of viaducts high over the city dripping stone 
like Spanish moss petrified in mid-collapse, kids up over 
the airy railings and onto the friendly back of the sleek 
city-cruising monster. They climb window to window, too 
full of grace ever to fall. Some of them, naturally, are 
spies: that honey-curled little cutie in the blue checked 
pinafore and blue knee-socks, up there under the gargoyle 
at the window listening in to Maximilian, who began 
drinking heavily as soon as the building started to move, 
and is now carrying on a long denunciation of Marcel 
under the thin scholarly disguise of trying to determine if 
the Gallic Genius can truly be said to have any “soul.” 


‘Young lady under gargoyle is taking it all down in short- 


hand. These are valuable data for the psychological war- 


fare effort. . 
For the first time now it becomes apparent that the 4 


792 Gravirty’s Rainsow 


and the Father-conspiracy do not entirely fill their world. 
Their struggle is not the only, or even the ultimate one. 
Indeed, not only are there many other struggles, but 
there are also spectators, watching, as spectators will do, 
hundreds of thousands of them, sitting around this dingy 
yellow amphitheatre, seat after seat plunging down in rows 
and tiers endless miles, down to the great arena, brown- 
yellow lights, food scattered on the stone slopes up higher, 
broken buns, peanut shells, bones, bottles half-filled with 
green or orange sweet, fires in small wind-refuges, set in 
angles where seats have been chiseled away, shallow de- 
pressions in the stone and a bed of cherry embers where 
old women are cooking hashes of the scavenged bits and 
crumbles and gristly lumps of food, heating them in thin 
frying pans of gray oil-water bubbling, as the faces of chil- 
dren gather around to wait for food, and in the wind the 
dark young man, the slippery young knife who waits for 
your maid outside the iron gate each Sunday, who takes 
her away to a park, a stranger’s automobile and a shape 
of love you can never imagine, stands now with his hair 
untended in the wind, his head averted from the fire, 
feeling the cold, the mountain cold, at his temples and 
high under his jaw... while beside other fires the women 
gossip, one craning over now and then to look miles down- 
ward at the stage, to see if a new episode’s come on yet 
—crowds of students running by dark as ravens, coats 
draped around shoulders, back out into a murky sector of 
seats which traditionally are never entered (being reserved 
for the Ancestors), their voices fading still very intense, 
dramatic, trying to sound good or at least acceptable. The 
women go on, playing cards, smoking, eating. See if you 
‘ean borrow a blanket from Rose’s fire over there, it’s 
gonna be cold tonight. Hey—and a pack of Armies while 
you're out—and come right back, hear me? Of course the 
cigarette machine turns out to be Marcel, who else, in 
another of his clever mechanical disguises, and inside one 
pack is a message for one of the spectators. “I’m sure you 
wouldn’t want Them to know about the summer of 1945. 
Meet me in the Male Transvestites’ Toilet, level L16/39C, 
station Metatron, quadrant Fire, stall Malkuth. You know 
what time. The usual Hour. Don’t be late.” a 
What’s this? What’re the antagonists doing here—in- 
filtrating their own audience? Well, they’re not really. It’s 


The Counterforce 793 


somebody else’s audience at the moment, and these nightly 
spectacles are an appreciable part of the darkside-hours 
life of the Rocket-capital. The chances for any para-_ 
dox here, really, are less than you think. 

Maximilian is way down in the bottom of the orchestra 
pit posing as the C-melody saxophone player, complete 
with Closet Intellectual Book, The Wisdom of the Great 
Kamikaze. Pilots, with illustrations by Walt Disney— 
screaming, hairy-nosed, front teeth in white dihedral, slant- 
eyed (long, elaborate curlicued shapes) round black lico- 
rice dog-nosed Japs, zoomin’ through ev'ry page! and any 
time he’s not playing that saxophone, you can be sure 
Maximilian will be, to the casual observer, immersed in 
this diffuse, though rewarding, work. Myrtle meantime is 
back in the candycane control room, manning the switch- — 
board and ready to swoop in at any time to save the 
others, who are sure (through their own folly if nothing 
else) to be in deep trouble soon. And Slothrop himself 
lurks in the Transvestites’ Toilet, in the smoke, the crowds, 
the buzzing fluorescent lights, piss hot as melted butter, 
making notes of all the dealing going on among the stalls; 
bowls ’n’ urinals (you’ve got to look butch but not. that 
butch and another thing no metal showing at any vital 
spots, she'll knock off ten marks for every one she sees, 
and the only bonuses she gives are spelled out here: blood 
drawn no first try, that’s an extra 20—) wondering if the, 
cigarette-pack message got through and if they ll come in 
person or if Pop'll send a hit man to try for a first-round | 
KO. 

Well, there is the heart of it: the monumental yellow 
structure, out there in the slum-suburban night, the never- 
sleeping percolation of life and enterprise through its shell, 
‘Outside and Inside interpiercing one another too fast, too 
finely labyrinthine, for either category to have much 
hegemony any more. The nonstop revue crosses its stage, 
crowding and thinning, surprising and jerking tears in an 
endless ratchet: 


Tue Low-FREQUENCY LISTENER 


The German U-boats communicated on a wave length 
of 28,000 meters, which is down around 10 kc. A half- 


_ wave antenna for that’d halfta be g miles high, or long, and 
eal 

yes. 

ee. 


794 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


even folded here and there it is still some antenna. It is. 
located at Magdeburg. So is the headquarters of the Ger- 
man branch of Jehovah’s Witnesses. So, for a time, is 
Slothrop, attempting to get through to the Argentine 
anarchist U-boat, now in unknown waters. The reason why 
is no longer clear to him. He was either visited again in 
some way by Squalidozzi, or he came upon Squalidozzi 
one day by accident, or he found, in some lint-picking 
attentionless search through pockets, rags or bedroll, the 
message he was given, back at the green edge of Aries, 
at the Café l’Eclipse long ago in Geneva. All he knows is 
that finding Squalidozzi, right now, is his overriding need. 

The Keeper of the Antenna is a Jehovah’s witness 
named Rohr. He’s just out of the Ravensbriick camp after 
being in since 36 (or ’37, he can’t remember). With that 
much camp time in, he’s politically reliable enough for 
the local G-5 to put him, nights, in control of the network 
of longest wavelength in the Zone. Although this could be 
accidental, more likely there is some eccentric justice 
lately begun to operate out here which it would behoove 
Slothrop to look into. There are rumors of a War Crimes 
Tribunal under way in Niimberg. No one Slothrop has 
listened to is clear who’s trying whom for what, but re- 
member that these are mostly brains ravaged by antisocial 
and mindless pleasures. 

But the only people—if any—apt to be communicating 
these days on 28,000 meters (the distance from Test Stand 
VII at Peenemiinde to the HafenstraBe in Greifswald, 
where Slothrop in early August may see a particular 
newspaper photo), except for freak Argentine anarchists, 
are the undenazified Nazis still wandering around in un- 
accounted-for submarines holding their own secret ship- 
board tribunals against enemies of the Reich. So the closest 
thing in the Zone to an early Christian is put on to listen” 
for news of unauthorized crucifixions. 

“Someone the other night was dying,” Rohr tells him, 
“I don’t know if he was inside the Zone or out at sea. He 
wanted a priest. Should I have got on) and told him 
about priestsP Would he’ve found any c comfort in that? 
It’s so painful sometimes. We’re really trying to be Chris- 
tians. . 

“My folks were Conyrégutiondndes Slothrop offers, “I 


The Counterforce 795 


think.” It’s getting harder to remember either of them, as 
Broderick progresses into Pernicious Pop and Nalline into 
ssshhhghhh ... (into what? What was that word? What- 
ever it is, the harder he chases, the faster it goes away). 


Mom Storsropr’s LETTER TO AMBASSADOR KENNEDY 


Well hi Joe how’ve ya been. Listen: Jew-zeppy—we're 
getting edgy about our youngest again. Would you try 
bothering a few of those jolly old London connections just 
once more? (Promisel!!l) Even if it’s old news it'll be good 
news for Poppy and I. I still remember what you said 
when the awful word about the PT boat came in, before 
you knew how Jack was. I'll never forget your words then. 
It’s every parent’s dream, Joe, that it is. 

Oh, and Hozay (whoops, don’t mind that, the pen just 
skidded as you can seel Naughty Nalline’s on her third 
martini, we'll have you know). Poppy and I heard your 
wonderful speech at the GE plant over in Pittsfield the 
other week. You’re in the groove, Mister K! How truel 
we've got to modemize in Massachusetts, or it'll just keep 
getting worse and worse. They're supposed to be taking a 
strike vote here next week. Wasn't the WLB set up to 
prevent just that? It isn’t starting to break down, is it, 
Joe? Sometimes, you know these fine Boston Sundays, 
when the sky over the Hill is broken into clouds, the way 
white bread appears through a crust you hold at your 
thumbs and split apart.... You know, don’t you? Golden 
clouds? Sometimes I think—ah, Joe, I think they’re pieces 
of the Heavenly City falling down. I’m sorry—didn’t mean 
this to get so gloomy all so sudden, it’s just... but it 
isn’t beginning to fall apart, is it, my old fellow Harvard- 
parent? Sometimes things aren’t very clear, that’s all. 
Things look like they’re going against us, and though it 
always turns out fine at the end, and we can always look 
back and say oh of course it had to happen that way, 
otherwise so-and-so wouldn’t have happened—still, while 
it’s happening, in my heart I keep getting this terrible 
fear, this empty place, and it’s very hard at such times 
really to believe in a Plan with a shape bigger than I 
can seeé.... 

Oh, anyway. Grumpy old thoughts away! Shoo! Martini 


796 Gravity's Ramnsow 


Number Four, comin’ up! 

Jack’s a fine boy. Really I love Jack like Hogan anc 
Tyrone, just like a son, my own son. I even. love him lik 
I don’t love my sons, ha-hal (she croaks) but then I’m : 
wicked old babe, you know that. No hope for the likes o 
Gis 


On THE PurasE “Ass BACKWARDS” 


“Something I have never understood about your lan 
guage, Yankee pig.” Sdure has been calling him “Yankee 
pig” all day now, a hilarious joke he will not leave alene 
often getting no further than “Yank—” before collapsin; 
into some horrible twanging phthisic wheeze of a laugh 
coughing up alarming ropy lungers of many colors anc 
marbling effects—green, for example, old-statue green a’ 
leafy dusk. 

“Sure,” replies Slothrop, “you wanna learn English, me 
teachee you English. Ask me anything, kraut.” It i: 
exactly the kind of blanket offer that’s always geeting 
Slothrop in trouble. |, 

“Why do you speak of certain reversals—machinery 
connected wrong, for instance, as being ‘ass backwards’! 
I can’t understand that. Ass usually is backwards, righti 
You ought to be saying ‘ass forwards,’ if backwards i: 
what you mean.” 

“Uh,” sez Slothrop. ; 

“This is only one of many American Mysteries,” Saure 
sighs, “I wish somebody could clear up for me. Not you, 
obviously.” bit i 

Saéure got a lotta gall picking on other people’s lan- 
guage like this. One night, back when he was a second- 
story man, he had the incredible luck to break into the 
affluent home of Minnie Khlaetsch, an astrologer of the 
Hamburg School, who was, congenitally it seems, unable 
to pronounce, even perceive, umlauts oyer vowels. That 
night she was just coming on to, what would prove to be an 
overdose of Hieropon, when Saure, who back in. those 
days was a curly-haired and good-looking kid, surprised 
her in her own bedroom with his hand ‘around an ivory 
chess Laufer with a sarcastic smile on its face, and filled 
with good raw Peruvian. cocaine still full of the Earth— 


The Counterforce 797 


Don’t call for help,” advises Saure flashing his phony 

scid bottle, “or that pretty face goes flowing off of its 

sones like vanilla pudding.” But Minnie calls his bluff, 

starts hollering for help to all the ladies of the same age 

in her building who feel that same motherly help-help- 

yut-make-sure-there’s-time-for-him-to-rape-me ambivalence 
about nubile cat burglars. What she means to scream is 

‘Hiibsch Rauber! Hiibsch Rauber!” which means “Cute- 

looking robber! Cute-looking robber!” But she can’t pro- 
nounce those umlauts, So it comés out “Hubschrauberl 

Hubschrauber!” which means “Helicopter! Helicopter!” 
well, it’s 1920-something, and nobody in earshot even 

knows what the word means, Liftscrewer, what’s thatP— 
nobody except one finger-biting paranoid aerodynamics 

student in a tenement courtyard far away, who heard the 
scream late in Berlin night, over tramclashing, rifle shots 
in another quarter, a harmonica novice who has been 
trying to play “Deutschland, Deutschland Uber Alles” for 
the past four hours, over and over missing notes, fucking 
up the time, the breathing ti... berall...es... indie... 
ie ...then longlong pause, oh come on asshole, you can 
find it—Welt sour, ach, immediately corrected ... through 
all this to him comes the cry Hubschrauber, liftscrewer, 2 
helix through cork air over wine of Earth falling bright, 
yes he knows exactly—and can this cry be a prophecy? a 
warming (the sky full of them, gray police in the hatch- 
ways with ray-guns cradled like codpieces beneath each 
whirling screw we see you from above there is nowhere 

to go it’s your last alley, your last stormcellar) to stay in- 
side and not interfere? He stays inside and does not inter- 
fere. He goes on to become “Spérri” of Horst Achtfaden’s 
confession to the Schwarzkommando. But he didn’t go to 
see what Minne was hollering about that night. She 
would’ve OD’d except for her boy friend Wimpe, an up- 
and-coming IG salesman covering the Eastern Territory, 
who'd blown into town after unexpectedly dumping all of 
his Oneirine samples on a party of American tourists back 
in hilltop Transylvania looking for a new kind. of thrills 
it’s me Liebchen, didn’t expect to be back so—but then 
he saw the sprawled satin creature, read pupil-size and 
skin-tint, swiftly went to his leather case for stimulant and 
‘syringe. That and an ice-filled bathtub got her back O.K. 


\ os | 


798 Gravity’s RAINBOW a 


““Ass’ is an intensifier,” Seaman Bodine now offers, “as 
in ‘mean ass,’ ‘stupid ass’-—well, when something is very 
backwards, by analogy you ’d say ‘backwards ass. Sy 

“But ‘ass backwards’ is ‘backwards ass’ backwards, _ 
Saure objects. 

“But gee that don’t make it mean forwards,” blinks 
Bodine with a sincere little break in his voice as if some- 
body’s just about to hit him—actually this is a bit of 
private fun for the spirited salt, it is a William Bendix 
imitation. Let the others do Cagney and Cery Grant, 
Bodine specializes in supporting roles, he can do a perfect 
Arthur Kennedy-as-Cagney’s-kid-brother, how about that? 
O-or Cary Grant’s faithful Indian water-bearer, Sam Jaffe. 
He is a white-hat in the navy of life, and that extends 
to vocal impressions of the fake film-lives of strangers. 

Saure meantime is into something like this with instru- 
mental soloists, or trying, teaching himself kind of by trial 
and error, currently ee-ee-aw-aw-ing his way through some 
hypothetical Joachim playing his own cadenza from the 
long-suppressed Rossini violin concerto (op. posth.), and 
in the process driving the household mad. One morning 
Trudi just goes stomping away into an 82nd Airborne mass 
jump over the conquered city, a million fleecy canopies 
in the sky, falling slow as white ash behind around the 
silhouette of her good-by stomp. “He’s driving me crazy.” 
“Hi Trudi, where you going?” “I just told you—crazyl” 
and don’t think this wretched old horny dopefiend doesn’t 
love her, because he does, and don’t think he isn’t praying, 
writing down his wishes carefully on cigarette papers, roll- 
ing up in them his finest sacramental kif and smoking 
them down to a blister on the lip, which is the dopefiend’s 
version of wishing on an evening star, hoping in his heart 
she’s just off on another stomp, please only a stomp, let 
it be over inside the day just one more time, he writes o 
each good-night’s reefer, that’s all, I won't ask ee Lr 
try not to, you know me, don’t judge me too hard, p leasg 

. but how many more of these stomps can there be? 
One. s going to be the last. Still he keeps jon ee-ee-aw-aw- 
ing with the Rossini, radiating his mean, lean, a 
edge street-longevity, no he can’t seem to stop it, it’s 
old man’s habit, he hates himself but it just comes on him 
Ho ribttor vhabeaticatied he brings to the problem, e 


The Counterforce — 799 


can’t stop drifting back into the catchy cadenza... .Sea- 
man Bodine understands, and is trying to help. To set up 
a useful interference, he has composed his own counter- 
cadenza, along the lines of those other pop tunes with 
classical names big around 1945 (“My Prelude to a Kiss,” 
“Tenement Symphony”)—every chance he gets, Bodine 
will croon it to the new weekly arrivals, Lalli just in from 
Liibeck, Sandra who’s run away from the Kleinbiirger- 
strasse, here’s vile Bodine with his guitar ambling pelvis- 
wiggling down the hallway after each naughty defector, 
each choice little sexcrime fantasy made flesh, singing 
and picking a moving rendition of: 


My Doper’s CaDENZA 


Tf you hear, a “box” so sweet, 
Play-in’ tunes-with, a peppy beat, 
That’s just MY DOPER’S, CADEN-ZA-A-A-A] 


Mel-o-dees, that getcha so, 
Where'd they come from? I don’t know! 
(h-ha) It’s just MY DOPER’S CADEN-ZA(A)A-A-Al 


This is Now I know it’s not as keen as old Rossini 
the oa [snatch of La Gazza Ladra here], 
ps Rn Nor as grand as Bach, or Beethoven-or-Br 
(bubububooloo] oo [sung to opening of Beethoven Sth, 
with full band]), ‘ 
But I’d give away the fames, of a hundred 
Harry James . . . wait, fame? of a hundred 
Jame? Jameses ... uh... fameses? Hmm 


[scherzoso] L-hi-hif this little-song, can-bring, you-to-my 
jpn the arms! 


Dum de dum, de-dum de dee, 
Oh, it’s better than a symphonee— 
It's MY DOPER’S CADENZA, to yoooouuu! 


These days, the tenement is known as “Der Platz,” and 
is nearly filled up, all the way in to the last central court- 
yard, with friends of Sdure’s. The change is unexpected— 
a lot more vegetation seems to be growing now in the 


800 Gravity’s RaInsow 


tenement dirt, an ingenious system of home-carpentered 
light ducts and mirrors adjusted throughout the day send 
sunlight, for the first time, down into these back courts, 
revealing colors never seen before... there’s also a rain- 
structure, to route the rain among flumes, funnels, splash- 
reflectors, waterwheels, nozzles, and weirs to make a 
system of rivers and waterfalls to play in this summer... 
the only rooms that can still be locked from the inside 
are reserved for isolates, fetishists, lost stumblers-in out of 
the occupation who need loneliness like the dopefiend 
needs his dope... speaking of which, everywhere in the 
complex now you can find army dope of all kinds stashed, 
from cellars to mansarde floors are littered with wire loops 
and plastic covers from 1%-grain syrettes of morphine tar- 
trate squeezed toothpaste-tube empty, broken amyl nitrite 
containers looted from anti-gas kits, olive-drab tins of 
Benzedrine ... work is proceeding on an anti-police moat 
around the entire tenement: to keep from drawing atten- 
tion, this moat here is the first in history being dug from 
inside out, the space directly below the Jacobistrasse, 
slowly, paranoiacally, is hollowed,. sculpted, carefully 
shored up under the thin crust of street so the odd tram 
won't find itself in unscheduled plunge—though it has 
been known to happen, out in the late night with interior 
tram-lights warm-colored as clear broth, out on the 
Peripheral runs through long stretches of unlighted park 
or along singing fences of storage depots all at once like a 
mouth pursing MF the blacktop buckles and you’re down 
in some dripping paranoids’ moat, the night-shift staring 
in with huge denizen-of-the-underground eyes, faced not 
with you so much as with the agonizing problem of de- 
ciding is this a real bus, or are these “passengers” really 
police agents in disguise well it’s a touchy business, 
touchy. papel Wy 

Somewhere in Der Platz now, early morning, some- 
body’s two-year-old, a baby as fat as a suckling pig, has 
just learned the word “Sonnenschein.” “Sunshine,” sez the 
baby, pointing, “Sunshine,” running into the other room. 

“Sunshine,” croaks some grownup morning-voice. 

“Sunshine!” hollers the baby, tottering off. 

“Sunshine,” a smiling-girl voice, maybe his mother. 


The Counterforce 801 


“Sunshine!” the baby at the window, showing her, show- 
ing anybody else who'll look, exactly. 


Smt ’n” SHINOLA 


“Now,” Saure wants to know, “you will tell me about 
the American expression ‘Shit from Shinola.’ a 

“What is this,” screams Seaman Bodine, “I’m being set 
tasks now? This is some Continuing Study of American 
Slang or some shit? Tell me you old fool,” grabbing Saure 
by throat and lapel and shaking him asymmetrically, 
“you're one of Them too, right? Come on,” the old man 
Raggedy Andy in his hands, a bad moming of suspicion 
here for the usually mellow Bodine, “Stop, stop,” snivels 
the amazed Saure, amazement giving way, that is, to a 
sniveling conviction that the hairy American gob has lost 


his mind. ... 


Well. You've heard the expression “Shit from Shinola.” 
As in, “Aw, he don’t know Shit from Shinola! *bout that.” 
Or, “Marine—you don’t know Shit from Shinola!” And 
you get sent to the Onion Room, or worse. One implica- 
tion is that Shit and Shinola are in wildly different cate- 
gories. You would envision—maybe just because they 
smell different—no way for Shit and Shinola to coexist. 
Simply impossible. A stranger to the English language, 
a German dopefiend such as Saure, not knowing either 
word, might see “Shit” as a comical interjection, one a 
lawyer in a bowler hat, folding up papers tucking them 
in a tan briefcase might smiling use, “Schitt, Herr Bum- 
mer,” and he walks out of your cell, the oily bastard, 
forever...or Scchhit! down comes a cartoon guillotine 
on one black & white politician, head bouncing downhill, 
lines to indicate amusing little spherical vortex patterns, 
and you thought yes, like to see that all right, yes cut it 
off, one less rodent, schitt ja! As for Shinola, we pass to 
universitarians Franz Pékler, Kurt Mondaugen, Bert Fibel, 
Horst Achtfaden and others, their Schein-Aula is a shim- 
mering, Albert Speer-style alabaster open-air stadium with 


giant cement birds of prey up at each comer, wings 


shrugged forward, sheltering under ¢ach wing-shadow a 


hooded German face... from the ‘outside, the Hall is 


- golden, the white gold precisely of one lily-of-the-valley 


ea ee 


802 Gravity’s Rainsow 


petal in 4 o’clock sunlight, serene at the top of a small, 


artificially-graded hill. It has a talent, this Seeming-Hall, 
for posing up there in attractive profiles, in front of noble 
clouds, to suggest persistence, through returns of spring, 
hopes for love, meltings of snow and ice, academic Sun- 
day tranquillities, smells of grass just crushed or cut or 
later turning to hay... but inside the Schein-Aula all is 
blue and cold as the sky overhead, blue as a blueprint or 
a planetarium. No one in here knows which way to look. 
Will it begin above usP Down thereP Behind us? In the 
middle of the airP and how soon.... | 

Well there’s one place where Shit ’n’ Shinola do come 
together, and that’s in the men’s toilet at the Roseland 
Ballroom, the place Slothrop departed from on his trip 
down the toilet, as revealed in the St. Veronica Papers 
(preserved, mysteriously, from that hospital’s great holo- 


caust). Shit, now, is the color white folks are afraid of. - 


Shit is the presence of death, not some abstract-arty char- 
acter with a scythe but the stiff and rotting corpse itself 
inside the whiteman’s warm and private own asshole, 


which is getting pretty intimate. That’s what that white - 


toilet’s for. You see many brown toilets? Nope, toilet’s 
the color of gravestones, classical columns of mausoleums, 
that white porcelain’s the very emblem of Odorless and 
Official Death. Shinola shoeshine polish happens to be the 
color of Shit. Shoeshine boy Malcolm’s in the toilet slappin’ 


on the Shinola, working off whiteman’s penance on his sin ~ 


of being born the color of Shit ’n’ Shinola. It is nice to 
think that one Saturday night, one floor-shaking Lindy- 
hopping Roseland night, Malcolm looked up from some 
Harvard kid’s shoes and caught the eye of Jack Kennedy 


(the Ambassador’s son), then a senior, Nice to think that — 


young Jack may have had one of them Immortal Light- 
bulbs then go on overhead—did Red suspend his rag- 


popping just the shadow of a beat, just enough gap in the — 
moiré there to let white Jack see through, not through to — 


but through through the shine on his classmate Tyrone — 


Slothrop’s shoesP Were the three ever lined up that way 
—sitting, squatting, passing through? Eventually Jack and 


Malcolm both got murdered. Slothrop’s fate is not so clear. © 


It may be that They have something different in mind for 
Slothrop. 4 


The Counterforce 803 
AN INCIDENT IN THE TRANSVESTITES TOILET 


A small ape or orangutan, holding something behind 
his back, comes sidling unobserved among net-stockinged 
legs, bobby sox rolled down to loop under ankle bones, 
subdeb beanies tucked into rayon aquamarine waist-sashes. _ 

- Finally he reaches Slothrop, who is wearing a blonde wig 
and the same long flowing white cross-banded number 
Fay Wray wears in her screentest scene with Robert Arm- 
strong on the boat (considering his history in the Roseland 
toilet, Slothrop may have chosen this gown not only out 
of some repressed desire to be sodomized, unimaginably, 
by a gigantic black ape, but also because of an athletic 
innocence to Fay that he’s never spoken of except to point 
and whisper, “Oh, look . . .,—some honesty, pluck, a clean- 
ness to the garment itself, its enormous sleeves so that 
wherever you pass is visibly where you've been...). 


At that first moment, long before our flight: 
Ravine, tyrannosaurus (flying-mares 

And jaws cracked out of joint), the buzzing serpent 
That jumped you in your own stone living space, 
The pterodactyl or the Fall, no—just .. . 

While I first hung there, forest and night at one, 
Hung waiting with the torches on the wall. 

And waiting for the night’s one Shape to come, 

I prayed then, not for Jack, still mooning sappy 
Along the weather-decks—no, I was thinking 

Of Denham—only him, with gun and camera 
Wisecracking in his best bum actor’s way 
Through Darkest Earth, making the unreal reel 
By shooting at it, one way or the other— 

om Denham, my director, my undying, 

Carl... 

Ah, show me the key light, whisper me a line. ... 


We've seen them under a thousand names... “Greta 
Erdmann” is only one, these dames whose job it is always 
to cringe from the Terror... well, home from work they 

fall asleep just like us and dream of assassinations, of plots 
against good and decent men.... 

The ape reaches up taps Slothrop on the ass, hands him 
- what he’s been carrying yaahhgghh it’s a round black iron 
anarchist bomb’s what it is, with lit fuse too. ... Ape goes 
» ‘scampering away. Slothrop just stands there, in the glassed 


aes 


804 Gravity’s Rainsow 


and humid rooms, his makeup starting to run, consterna- 
tion in his eyes clear as marbles and lips pressed into a 
bee-stung well-what-th’-heck-’m-I-s’posed-t’-do-now? He 
can’t say anything, the contact still hasn’t showed and his 
voice would blow his disguise....The fuse is burning 
_ shorter and shorter. Slothrop looks around. All the wash- 
bowls and urinals are occupied. Should he just put the 
fuse out in front of somebody’s cock, right in the stream 
of piss...uh, but wouldn’t that look like I was propo- 
sitioning them or something? Gee, sometimes I wish I 
wasn't so indecisive. . m-maybe if I picked somebody 
weaker than me. - but then it’s the little guys got the 
reflexes, remember— 

He is rescued from his indecision by a very. tall, fat, 
somewhat Oriental-looking transvestite, whose ideal, screen 
and personal, seems to be little Margaret O’Brien. Somehow - 
this Asiatic here is managing to look pigtailed and wistful 
even as he snatches the sputtering bomb away from Slo- 
throp, runs heaves it into an empty toiletbow] and flushes 
it, tuming back to Slothrop and the others with an air of 
civic duty well done when suddenly— 

KRUPPALOOMA comes this giant explosion: water 
leaps in a surprised blue-green tongue (ever seen a toilet 
hollering, “Yikes!”P) out of every single black-lidded bowl, 
pipes wrench and scream, walls and floor shudder, plaster 
begins to fall in crescents and powder-sheets as all the 
chattering transvestites fall silent, reach out to touch any- 
one nearby as a gesture of preparation for the Voice out 
of the Loudspeaker, saying: 

“That was a sodium bomb, Sodium explodes when 
it touches water.” So the fuse was a dummy, the dirty 
rat....“You saw who threw it in the toilet. He is a 
dangerous maniac. Apprehend him, and therell be a 
large reward, Your closet could make Norma Shearer’s 
look like the wastebasket in Gimbel’s basement.” “3 

So they all leap on the poor protesting Margaret 
O’Brien devotee, while Slothrop, for whom the humilia- 
tion and (presently, as the arrival of the police grows 
later and later) the sexual abuse and torture were really 
intended (Gotta hand it to ya, Pop!) slips away, loosening 
as he nears the outside the satin ties of his gown, dragging 
reluctantly, off of his grease-chevroned head, the shining 


wig of inndcence.... 


4 ; 
Sa 


The Counterforce 805 


A MoMENT oF Fun witH TAKESHI AND ICHIZO, 
THE KomMiIcAL KAMIKAZES 


Takeshi is tall and fat (but doesn’t braid his hair like 
' that Margaret O’Brien) Ichizo is short and skinny. Takeshi 
_ flies a Zero, while Ichizo flies an Ohka device, which is a 
long bomb, actually, with a cockpit for Ichizo to. sit in, 
stub wings, rocket propulsion and a few control surfaces 
back aft. Takeshi only had to go to Kamikaze School for 
- two weeks, on Formosa. Ichizo had to go to Ohka school 
for six months, in Tokyo. They are as different as peanut 
butter and jelly, these two. No fair asking which is which. 
_ They are the only two Kamikazes out here at this air 
‘base, which is rather remote actually, on an island that 
nobody, well, really cares much about, any more. The 
fighting is going on at Leyte... then on to Iwo Jima, moy- 
ing toward Okinawa, but always too far away for any 
sortie from here to reach. But they have their orders, and 
_ their exile. Not much to do for kicks but go wandering. 
on the beaches looking for dead Cypridinae. These are 
_ crustaceans with three eyes, shaped like a potato with cat- 
whiskers at one end. Dried and powdered, Cypridinae are 
_also a great source of light. To make the stuff glow in the 
dark, all you do is add water. The light is blue, weird 
multishaded blue—some green in it, and some indigo— 
amazingly cool and nocturnal blue. On moonless or over- 
cast nights, Takeshi and Ichizo take off all their clothes 
_and splash each other with Cypridina light, running and 
_ giggling under the palm trees. 
Every morning, and sometimes evening too, the Scatter- 
 brained Suicidekicks mosey down to the palm-thatched 
radar shack to see if there's any American targets worth 
a crash-dive, anywhere inside their flying radius. But it’s 
the same story every time. Old Kenosho the loony radar- 
man who's always brewing up a batch of that sake back 
in the transmitter room, in a still he’s hooked up to a 
magnetron tube in some fiendish-Nip way that defies 
_ Western science, every time the fellas show up this 
drunken old reprobate starts cackling, “No dying today! 
No dying today! So solly!” pointing at all the blank PPI 
Scopes, green radii sweeping silent round and round trail- 
- ing clear webs of green shampoo, nothing but surface return 
‘ for more miles than you can fly, and of the fatal mandala 


i \ 


\ 


806 “Grayrry’s RAINBOW 


both hearts would leap to, green carrier-blob screened 
eight-fold in a circle of destroyer-strokes, nothing... no, 
each morning’s the same—only the odd whitecap and 
old hysterical Kenosho, who by now is on the floor gagging 
on saliva and tongue, having his Seizure, an eagerly 
awaited part of each daily visit, each fit trying to top the 
one before, or at least bring in a new twist—a back-fiip 
in the air, a gnaw or two after Takeshi’s blue-and-yellow 
patent wingtips, an improvised haiku: 


The lover leaps in the volcano! 
It’s ten feet deep, 
And inactive— 


as the two pilots mug, giggle, and jump around trying to 
avoid the grizzled old radarman’s thrashings—what? You 
didn’t like the haiku. It wasn’t ethereal enough? Not 
Japanese at allP In fact it sounded like something right 
outa Hollywood? Well, Captain—yes you, Marine Cap- 
tain Esberg from Pasadena—you, have just had, the 
Mystery Insight! (gasps and a burst of premonitory 
applause) and so you—are our Paranoid... For The Day! 
(band burst into “Button Up Your Overcoat,” or ‘any 
other suitably paranoid up-tempo tune, as the bewildered 
contestant is literally yanked to his feet and dragged out 
in the aisle by this M.C. with the gleaming face and 
rippling jaw). Yes, it is a movie! Another World War II 
situation comedy, and your chance, to find out what it’s 
really like, because you—have won (drumroll, more gasps, 
more applauding and whistling) an all-expense, one-way 
trip for one, to the movie's actual location, exotic 
Puke-a-hook-a-look-i Island! (the orchestra’s ukulele section 
taking up now a tinkling reprise of that “White Man 
Welcome” tune we last heard in London being directed 
at Géza Rozsavélgyi) on a giant TWA Constellation! 
You'll while ‘your nights away chasing vampire mosquitoes 
away from your own throat! Getting blind lost, out in 
the middle of torrential tropical downpours! Scooping rat 
turds out of the enlisted men’s water barrel! But it won't 
be all nighttime giddiness and eas Captain, be- 
cause daytimes, up at five a.m. sharp, you'll be out making 
the acquaintance of the Kamikaze Zero you'll be flying! 
getting all checked out on those controls, making sure i 


| | 


The Counterforce 807 


you know just where that bomb-safety-release is! A-ha- 
hand of course, trying to stay out of the way, of those 
- two Nonsensical’ Nips, Takeshi and Ichizo! as they go 
about their uproarious weekly adventures, seemingly ob- 
livious to your presence, and the frankly ominous impli- 
. cations of your day’s routine. ... 


STREETS 


Strips of insulation hang up in the morning fog, after 
a night of moon brightening and darkening as if by itself, 
_ because the blowing fog was so smooth, so hard to see. 

Now, when the wind blows, yellow sparks will spill away 

with a rattlesnake buzz from the black old fraying wires, 
against a sky gray as a hat. Green glass insulators go 
cloudy and blind in the day. Wood poles lean and smell 
' old: thirty-year-old wood. Tarry transformers hum aloft. 

As if it will really be a busy day. In the middle distance 
- poplars just emerge out of the haze. 

It could have been the Semlower Strasse, in Stralsund. 
The windows have the same ravaged look: the insides of 
all the rooms seem to’ve been gutted black. Perhaps there 
is a new bomb that can destroy only the insides of struc- 
tures...no... it was in Greifswald. Across some wet rail- 
_ toad tracks were derricks, superstructure, tackle, smells of 
_canalside ... Hafenstrasse in Greifswald, down over his 
back fell the cold shadow. of some massive church. But 
isn’t that the Petritor, that stunted brick tower-arch 
_)straddling the alleyway ahead... it could be the Sli- 
‘terstrasse in the old part of Rostock ... or the Wandfarber- 
_ Strasse in Liineburg, with pulleys high up on the brick 
_ gables, openwork weathercocks up at the very peaks... 
_ why was he looking upward? Upward from any of a score 
of those northern streets, one morning, in the fog. The 
farther north, the plainer things grow. There’s one gutter, 
_down the middle of the alley, where the rain runs off. 
_Cobbles are laid straighter and there aren’t as many 
tigarettes to be had. Garrison-churches echo with star- 
lings. To come into a northern Zone town is to enter a 
ange harbor, from the sea, on a foggy day. 

_ But in each of these streets, some vestige of humanity, 
f Earth, has to remain. No matter what has been done to 
matter what it’s been used for... . 


ae eS 


Me 
i 


808 Gravity's RaInBsow 


There were men called “army chaplains.” They preached 
inside some of these buildings. There were actually 
soldiers, dead now, who sat or stood, and listened. Holding 
on to what they could. Then they went out, and some 
died before they got back inside a garrison-church again. 
Clergymen, working for the army, stood up and talked to 
the men who were going to die about God, death, noth- 
ingness, redemption, salvation. It really happened. It was 
quite common. 

Even in a street used for that, still there will be one 
time, one dyed afternoon (coaltar-impossible orange- 
brown, clear all the way through), or one day of rain and 
clearing before bedtime, and in the yard one hollyhock, 
circling in the wind, fresh with raindrops fat enough to 
be chewed... one face by a long sandstone wall and the 
scuffle of all the doomed horses on the other side, one 
hair-part thrown into blue shadows at a turn of her head 
—one busful of faces passing through in the middle of the 
night, no one awake in the quiet square but the driver, 
the Ortsschutz sentry in some kind of brown, official-look- 
ing uniform, old Mauser at sling arms, dreaming not of 
the enemy outside in the swamp or shadow but of home 
and bed, strolling now with his civilian friend who’s off- 
duty, can’t sleep, under the trees full of road-dust and 
night, through their shadows on the sidewalks, playing a 
harmonica...down past the row~of faces in the bus, 
drowned-man green, insomniac, tobacco-starved, scared, 
not of tomorrow, not yet, but of this pause in their night- 
passage, of how easy it will be to lose, and how much it 
will hurt.... 

At least one moment of passage, one it will hurt to lose, 
ought to be found for every street now indifferently gray 
with commerce, with war, with repression... finding it, 
learning to cherish what was lost, mightn’t we find some 
way back? 2 

In one of these streets, in the morning fog, plastered 
over two slippery cobblestones, is a scrap of newspaper 
headline, with a wirephoto of a giant whit coc dangling 
in the sky straight downward out of a white pubic bush. 
The letters 

* 
MB DRO 
ROSHI 


The Counterforce 809 


_ appear above with the logo of some occupation newspaper, 
a grinning glamour girl riding astraddle the cannon of a 


tank, steel penis with slotted serpent head, 3rd Armored 


treads ’n’ triangle on a sweater rippling across her tits. 
_ The white image has the same coherence, the hey-lookit-— 
- me smugness, as the Cross does. It is not only a sudden 
- white genital onset in the sky—it is also, perhaps, a 


‘Trees. < a 
Slothrop sits on a curbstone watching it, and the letters, 


and girl with steel cock waving hi fellas, as the fog 


whitens into morning, and figures with carts, or dogs, or 
bicycles go by in brown-gray outlines, wheezing, greeting 
briefly in fog-flattened voices, passing. He doesn't re- 
member sitting on the curb for so long staring at the 
picture. But he did. oe 

At the instant it happened, the pale Virgin was rising 
in the east, head, shoulders, breasts, 17° 36’. down to her 
maidenhead at the horizon. A few doomed Japanese knew 


_ of her as some Western deity. She loomed in the eastern 
sky gazing down at the city about to be sacrificed. The 


sun was in Leo. The fireburst came. roaring and 
sovereign, ... ~ 


LISTENING TO THE TOILET 


The basic idea is that They will come and shut off the 
water first. The cryptozoa who live around the meter will 
be paralyzed by the great inbreak of light from over- 
head...then scatter like hell for lower, darker, wetter. 
Shutting the water off interdicts the toilet: with only one 
tankful left, you really can’t get rid of much of anything 
any more, dope, shit, documents, They've stopped the 
inflow/outflow and here you are trapped inside Their 
frame with your wastes piling up, ass hanging out all over 
Their Movieola viewer, waiting for Their editorial blade. 
Reminded, too late, of how dependent you are on Them, 
for neglect if not good will: Their neglect is your freedom. 
But when They do come on it’s like society-gig Apollos, 


_ striking the lyre 


ZONGGG . 
Everything freezes. The sweet, icky chord hangs in the 
air...there is no way to be at ease with it. If you try 


_the “Are you quite finished, Superintendent?” gambit, the 


+ 


Be ic 


> / 


810 Gravity's RaInsow 


man will answer, “No, as a matter of fact...no, you nasty 
little wet-mouthed prig, I’m not half finished, not with 
youlate 

So it’s good policy always to have the toilet valve 
cracked a bit, to maintain some flow through:the toilet so 
when it stops you'll have that extra minute or two. Which 
is not the usual paranoia of waiting for a’ knock, or a 
phone to ring: no, it takes a particular kind of mental 
illness to sit and listen for a cessation of noise. But— 

Imagine this very elaborate scientific lie: that sound 
cannot travel through outer space. Well, but. suppose it 
can. Suppose They don’t want us to know there is a medium 
there, what used to be called an “aether,” which can 
carry sound to every part of the Earth. The Soniferous 
Aether. For millions of years, the sun has been roaring, a 
giant, furnace, 93 millionmile roar, so perfectly steady that 
generations of men have been born into it and passed out 
of it again, without ever hearing it. Unless it changed, how 
would anybody know? 

Except that at night now and then, in some part of the 
dark hemisphere, because of eddies in the Soniferous 
Aether, there will come to pass a very shallow pocket of 
no-sound, For a few seconds, in a particular place, nearly 
every night somewhere in the World, sound-energy from 
Outside is shut off. The roaring of the sun stops. For its 
brief life, the point of sound-shadow may come to rest a 
thousand feet above a desert, between floors in an empty 
office building, or exactly around a seated individual in a’ 
working-class restaurant where they hose the place out at 
3 every morning... it’s all white tile, the chairs and tables 
riveted solid into the floor, food covered with rigid shrouds 
of clear plastic... soon, from outside, rrrmmnn! clank, drag, 
squeak of valve opening oh yes, ah- yes, Here Are The 
Men With The Hoses To Hose The Place Out— . 

At which instant, with no warning, the arousing feather- 
point of the Sound-Shadow has touched you, enveloping 
you in sun-silence for oh, let us say 2:36:18 to 2:36:24, 
Central War Time, unless the location is Dungannon, Vir- 
ginia, Bristol, Tennessee, Asheville or peice North 
Carolina, Apalachicola, Florida, or conceivably in Murdo 
Mackenzie, South Dakota, or Phillipsburg, Kansas, or 
Stockton, Plainville, or Ellis, Kansas—yes sounds like a 


The Counterforce 811 


Roll of Honor don’t it, being read off someplace out on 
the prairie, foundry colors down the sky in long troughs, 
red and purple, darkening crowd of civilians erect and 
nearly-touching as wheat stalks, and the one old man in 
black up at the microphone, reading off the towns of the 
war dead, Dungannon... Bristol... Murdo Mackenzie... 
his white hair blown back by a sculpting thine-alabaster- 
cities wind into leonine wreathing, his stained pored old 
face polished by wind, sandy with light, earnest outboard 
corners of his eyelids folding down as one by one, echoing 
out over the anvil prairie, the names of death-towns un- 
reel, and ape! Bleicherdde or Blicero will be spoken any 
minute now. 

Well, you're  torong, champ—these happen to be towns 
all located on the borders of Time Zones, is all. Ha, hal 
Caught you with your hand in your pants! Go on, show us 
all what you were doing or leave the area, we don’t need 
your kind around. There’s nothing so loathsome as a sen- 
timental surrealist. 

“Now—the eastern towns we've listed are on Eastern 
War Time. All the other towns along the interface are on 
Central. The western towns just read off are on Central, 
while the other towns along that interface are on Moun- 
tain. . 

Which is all our Sentinmental Surrealist, leaving the 
area, gets to hear. Just as well. He is more involved, or 
“unhealthily obsessed,” if you like, with the moment of sun- 


_ silence inside the white tile greasy-spoon. It seems like a 
_ place he has been (Kenosha, Wisconsin?) already, though 


he can’t remember in what connection. They called him 


. “the Kenosha Kid,” though this may be apocryphal. By 
_ now, the only other room he can remember being in was a 


two-color room, nothing but the two exact colors, for all 
the lamps, furniture, drapes, walls, ceiling, rug, radio, even 
book jackets in the shelves—everything was either (1) 
Deep Cheap-Perfume Aquamarine, or ( 2) Creamy Choco- 
late FBI-Shoe Brown. That may’ve been in Kenosha, may 
not. If he tries he will remember, in a minute, how he got 


fo the white tiled room half an hour before hose-out time, 
He is sitting with a coffee cup half full, heavy sugar and 


cream, crumbs of a pineapple Danish under the saucer 
where his fingers can’t reach, Sooner or later he'll have to 


812 Gravity’s RAINBOW © 


move the saucer to get them. He’s just holding off. But it 
isn’t sooner and it isn’t later, because 

the sound-shadow comes down on him, 

settles around his table, with the invisible long vortex 
surfaces that brought it here swooping up away like whorls 
of an Aetheric Danish, audible only by virtue of accidental 
bits of sound-debris that may happen to be caught in the 
eddying, voices far away out at sea our position is two 
seven degrees two six minutes north, a woman crying in 
some high-pitched language, ocean waves in gale winds, a 
voice reciting in Japanese, 


Hi wa Ri ni katazu, 
Ri wa Ho ni katazu, 
Ho wa Ken ni katazu, 
Ken wa Ten ni katazu, 


which is the slogan of a Kamikaze unit, an Ohka outfit—it 
means 


Injustice cannot conquer Principle, 

Principle cannot conquer Law, 

Law cannot conquer Power, | ‘ 
Power cannot conquer Heaven, 


Hi, Ri, Ho, Ken, Ten go Jap-gibbering away on the long 
solar eddy and leave the Kenosha Kid at the riveted table, 
where the roaring of the sun has stopped. He is hearing, 
for the first time, the mighty river of his blood, the Titan’s 
drum of his heart. 

Come into the bulbshine and sit with him, with the 
stranger at the small public table. It’s almost hosing-out 
time. See if you can sneak in under the shadow too. Even 
a partial eclipse is better than never finding out—better 
than cringing the rest of your life under the great Vacuum 
in the sky they have taught you, and a sun whose silence 
you never get to hear. 

What if there is no Vacuum? Or if there is—what if 
They're using it on you? What if They find it convenient 
to preach an island of life surrounded by 2\void? Not just 
the Earth in space, but your own individual life in time? _ 
What if it’s in Their interest to have you believing that? — 

“He won't bother us for a while,” They tell each other. — 
“I just put him on the Dark Dream.” They drink together, 


The Counterforce 813 


_shoot very very synthetic drugs into skin or blood, run in- 

credible electronic waveforms into Their skulls, directly 
into the brainstem, and backhand each other, playfully, 
with openmouth laugh—you know, don’t you is in those 
ageless eyes... They speak of taking So-and-So and 
“putting him on the Dream.” They use the phrase for each 
other too, in sterile tenderness, when bad news is passed, 
at the annual Roasts, when the endless mindgaming 
catches a colleague unprepared—‘“Boy, did we put him 
on the Dream.” You know, don’t you? 


Wirty REPARTEE 


Ichizo comes out of the hut, sees Takeshi in a barrel 
under some palm leaves taking a bath and singing “Doo- 
doo-doo, doo-doo,” some koto tune, twanging through his 
nose—Ichizo screams runs back inside reemerging with a 
Japanese Hotchkiss machine gun, a Model g2, begins setting 
it up with a lot of jujitsu grunting and eyepopping. About 
the time he’s got the ammo belt poised, ready to riddle 
Takeshi in the tub, 

TakesH; Wait a minute, wait a minute! What’s all this? 

Icurzo: Oh, it’s you! I—thought it was General Mac- 
Arthur, in his—rowboat! 

Interesting weapon, the Hotchkiss. Comes in many 
nationalities, and manages to fit in ethnically wherever it 
goes. American Hotchkisses are the guns that raked 
through the unarmed Indians at Wounded Knee. On the 
lighter side, the racy 8 mm French Hotchkiss when fired 
goes haw-haw-haw-haw, just as nasal and debonair as a 
movie star. As for our cousin John Bull, a lot of British 
Hotchkiss heavies were either resold privately after World 
War I, or blowtorched. These melted machine guns will 
show up now and then in the strangest places. Pirate 
Prentice saw one in 1936, during his excursion with 
Scorpia Mossmoon, at the Chelsea home of James Jello, 
that year’s king of Bohemian clowns—but a minor king, 

_ from a branch prone to those loathsome inbred diseases, 

idiocy in the family, sexual peculiarities surfacing into 

public view at most inappropriate times (a bare penis 

dangling out of a dumpster one razor-clear and rainwashed 

_ morning, in an industrial back-street about to be swarmed 

_ up by a crowd of angry workers in buttontop baggy caps 
nt : 


814 Gravity’s Ramnsow 


carrying spanners three feet long, Kelly crowbars, lengths 
of chain, here’s bareass Crown Prince Porfirio with a giant 
halo of aluminum-shaving curls on his head, his mouth 
made up with black grease, his soft buttocks squirming 
against the cold refuse picking up steel splinters that sting 
deliciously, his eyes sultry and black as his lips, but oh 
dear what’s this, oh how embarrassing here they come 
around the corner he can smell the rabble from here, 
though they are not too sure about Porfirio—the march 
pauses in some confusion as these most inept revolutionar- 
ies fall to arguing whether the apparition is a diversionary 
nuisance planted here by the Management, or whether he’s 
real Decadent Aristocracy to be held for real ransom and 
if so how much... while up on the rooftops, out from the 
brick and corrugated doorways begin to appear brown 
Government troops manning British Hotchkisses which 
were not melted down, but bought up by machinegun 
jobbers and sold to a number of minor governments around 
the world). It may have been in memory of Crown Prince 
Porfirio that day of massacre that J. ames Jello kept a melted 
Hotchkiss in his rooms—or it may’ve been only another 
flight of moteeauenie on dear James's part you print he’s 
so unaware. 


HEART-TO-HEART, MAN-TO-MAN 


—Son, been wondering about this, ah, “screwing in” 
you kids are doing. This matter of the, shooting electricity 
into head, ha-haP 

—Waves, Pop. Not just raw electricity. That’s fer drips! 

—Yes, ah, waves. “Keying waves,” rightP ha-hah. Uh, 
tell me, son, what’s it like? You know Ive been something 
of a doper all m life, a-and— 

—Oh Pop. Cripes. It isn’t like dope at alll 

—Well we got off on some pretty good “vacations” we 
called them then, some pretty “weird” areas they got t us 
into ’s a matter of fact— 

—But you always came back, didn’t ou 

—What? 

—TI mean it was always understood that ‘this would still 
be here when you got back, just the same, exactly the 
same, rightP 

—Well ha-ha guess that’s why we called ’em vacations, | 


The Counterforce Bat 815. 


son! Cause you always do come back to old Realityland, 
don’t you. 

—You always did. 

—Listen Tyrone, you don’t know. how dangerous that 
stuff is. Suppose someday you just plug in and go away 
and never come back? Eh? 

—Ho, ho! Don’t I wish! What do you think every elec- 
trofreak dreams about? You're such an old fuddyduddy! 
A-and who sez it’s a dream, huh? M-maybe it exists. 
Maybe there is a Machine to take us away, take us com- 
pletely, suck us out through the electrodes out of the skull © 
’n’ into the Machine and live there forever with all the 
other souls it’s got stored there. It could decide who it 


- would suck out, a-and when. Dope never gave you im- 


mortality. You hadda come back, every time, into a dying 
hunk of smelly meat! But We can live forever, in a clean, 
honest, purified Electroworld— 

—Shit that’s what I get, havin’ a double Virgo fer a 
son. ... 


Some CHARACTERISTICS OF ImIPOLEX G 


Imipolex G is the first plastic that is actually erectile. 
Under suitable stimuli, the chains grow cross-links, which 
stiffen the molecule and increase intermolecular attraction 
so that this Peculiar Polymer runs far outside the known 
phase diagrams, from limp rubbery amorphous to amazing 
perfect tessellation, hardness, brilliant transparency, high 
resistance to temperature, weather, vacuum, shock of any 
kind (slowly gleaming in the Void. Silver and black. 
Curvewarped reflections of stars flowing across, down the 
full length of, round and round in meridians exact as the 
meridians of acupuncture. What are the stars but points in 
the body of God where we insert the healing needles of 
our terror and longing? Shadows of the creature’s bones 
and ducts—leaky, wounded, irradiated white—mingling in 
with its own. It is entangled with the bones and ducts, its 
own shape determined by how the Erection of the Plastic 


_ shall proceed: where fast and where slow, where painful 
_ and where slithery-cool...whether ‘areas shall exchange 


characteristics of hardness and brilliance, whether some 


areas should be allowed to flow over the surface so that 
| . the passage will be a caress, where to orchestrate sudden 


s 
ai) 
: 


ee 


- 


816 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


discontinuities—blows, wrenchings—in among these more 
caressive moments). 

Evidently the stimulus would have had to be electronic. 
Alernatives for signaling to the plastic surface were 
limited: 

(a) a thin matrix of wires, forming a rather close-set 
coordinate system over the Imipolectic Surface, whereby 
erectile and other commands could be sent to an area 
quite specific, say on the order of 44 cm?, 

(b) a beam-scanning system—or several—analogous to 
the well-known video electron stream, modulated with 
grids and deflection plates located as needed on the Sur- 
face (or even below the outer layer of Imipolex, down at 
the interface with What lies just beneath: with What has 
been inserted or What has actually grown itself a skin of 
Imipolex G, depending which heresy you embrace. We 
need not dwell here on the Primary Problem, namely that 
everything below the plastic film does after all lie in the 
Region of Uncertainty, except to emphasize to beginning 
students who may be prone to Schwarmerei, that terms 
referring to the Subimipolexity such as “Core” and “Center 
of Internal Energy” possess, outside the theoretical, no 


more reality than do terms such as “Supersonic Region” or 


“Center of Gravity” in other areas of Science), 

(c) alternatively, the projection, onto the Surface, of an 
electronic “image,” analogous to a motion picture. This 
would require a minimum of three projectors, and perhaps 
more. Exactly how many is shrouded in another order of 
uncertainty: the so-called Otyiyumbu Indeterminacy Rela- 
tion (“Probable functional derangement yr resulting from 
physical modification ¢x (x,y,z) is directly proportional to 
a higher power p of sub-imipolectic derangement yB, p 
being not necessarily an integer and determined empir- 
ically”), in which subscript R is for Rakete, and B for 
Blicero. 

y 


oO poe 
ave} 
Meantime, Tchitcherine has found it necessary to abandon 


his smegma-gathering stake-out on the Argentine anar- — 
chists. The heat, alias Nikolai Ripov of the Commissariat for _ 


: 


The Counterforce 817 


Intelligence Activities, is in town and closing in. The faith- 
ful Dzabajev, in terror or disgust, has gone off across the 
cranberry bogs on a long wine binge with two local 
derelicts, and may never be back. Rumor sez he is cutting 
a swath these days across the Zone in a stolen American 
Special Services getup, posing as Frank Sinatra. Comes into 
town finds a tavern and starts crooning out-on the side- 
walk, pretty soon there’s a crowd, subdeb cuties each a 
$65 fine and worth every penny dropping in epileptiform 
seizures into selfless heaps of cable-stitching, rayon pleats 
and Xmastree appliqué. It works. It’s always good for free 
wine, an embarrassment of wine, rolling Fuder and Fass 
in a rumbling country procession through the sandy streets, 
wherever the Drunkards Three find themselves. Never 
occurs to anybody to ask what Frank Sinatra’s doing 
flanked by this pair of wasted rumdums. Nobody doubts 
for a minute that it is Sinatra. Town hepcats usually take 
the other two for a comedy team. 

While nobles are crying in their nights’ chains, the 
squires sing. The terrible politics of the Grail can never 
touch them. Song is the magic cape. 

Tchitcherine understands that he is finally alone now. 
Whatever is to find him will find him alone. 

He feels obliged to be on the move, though there’s no- 
place for him to go. Now, too late, the memory of Wimpe, 
longago IG Farben V-Mann, finds him. Tags along for the 
run. Tchitcherine was hoping he might find a dog. A dog 
would have been ideal, a perfect honesty to calibrate his 
own against, day to day, till the end. A dog would have 
been good to have along. But maybe the next best thing 
is an albatross with no curse attached: an amiable memory. 

Young Tchitcherine was the one who brought up polit- 
ical narcotics, Opiates of the people. 

Wimpe smiled back. An old, old smile to chill even the 
living fire in Earth’s core, “Marxist dialectics? That’s not 
an opiate, eh?” é 

“It’s the antidote.” z 

“No.” It can go either way. The dope salesman may 

know everything that’s ever going to happen to Tchi- 
tcherine, and decide it’s no use—or, out of the moment’s 
velleity, lay it right out for the young fool. 

“The basic problem,” he proposes, “has always been 


818 Gravity’s Rainsow — 


getting other people to die for you. What’s worth enough 
for a man to give up his life? That’s where religion had 
the edge, for centuries. Religion was always about death. 
It was used not as an opiate so much as a technique—it 
got people to die for one particular set of beliefs about 
death, Perverse, natiirlich, but who are you to judge? It 
was a good pitch while it worked, But ever since it be- 
came impossible to die for death, we have had a secular 
version—yours. Die to help History grow to its predes- 
tined shape. Die knowing your act will bring a good end 
a bit closer. Revolutionary suicide, fine, But look: if His- 
tory’s changes are inevitable, why not not die? Vaslav? If 
it’s going to happen anyway, what does it matter?” 

“But you haven’t ever had the choice to make, have 
you.” 

“If I ever did, you can be sure—” 

“You don’t know. Not till you’re there, Wimpe. You 
can’t say.” 

“That doesn’t sound very dialectical.” 

“I don’t know what it is.” 

“Then, right up till the point of decision,” Wimpe 
curious but careful, “a man could still be perfectly 


pure...” 

“He could be anything. J don’t care. But he’s only real 
at the points of decision. The time between doesn’t mat- 
ter.” / 

“Real to a Marxist.” 

“No. Real to himself.” 

Wimpe looks doubtful. 

“T’ve been there. You haven't.” . 

Shh, shh, A syringe, a number 26 point. Bloods stifling 
in the brownwood hotel suite. To chase or worry this argu- 
ment is to become word-enemies, and neither man really 
wants to. Oneirine theophosphate is one way around the 
problem. (Tchitcherine: “You mean thiophosphate, don’t 
youP” Thinks indicating the presence of sulfur. ... Wimpe: 
“I mean theophosphate, Vaslav,” 4 the Presence 
of God.) They shoot up: Wimpe eying the water-tap ner- 
vously, recalling Tchaikovsky, salmonella, a|fast medley of © 
whistlable tunes from the Pathétique, But Tchitcherine 
has eyes only for the point, its German precision, its fine 
steel grain. Soon he will come to know a circuit of aid — 


. . eg 


The Counterforce 819 


stations and field hospitals, as good for postwar nostalgia 

_ as a circuit of peacetime spas—army surgeons and dentists 
will bond and hammer patent steel for life into his suffer- 
ing flesh, and pick out what has entered it by violence 
with an electromagnetic device bought between the wars 
from Schumann of Diisseldorf, with a light bulb and ad- 
justable reflector, 2-axis locking handles and a complete 
set of weird-shaped Polschuhen, iron pieces to modify the 

- shape of the magnetic field... but there in Russia, that 
night with Wimpe, was his first taste—his initiation into 
the bodyhood of steel...no way to separate this from 
the theophosphate, to separate vessels of steel from the 
ungodly insane rush.... 

For 15 minutes the two of them run screaming all over 
the suite, staggering around in circles, lined up with the 
rooms’ diagonals. There is in Laszlo Jamf’s celebrated 
molecule a particular twist, the so-called “Pékler singu- 
larity,” occurring in a certain crippled indole ring, which 
later Oneirinists, academician and working professional 
alike, are generally agreed is responsible for the hallucina- 
tions which are unique to this drug. Not only audiovisual, 
they touch all senses, equally. And they recur. Certain 
themes, “mantic archetypes” (as Jollifox of the Cambridge 
School has named them), will find certain individuals 
again and again, with a consistency which has been well 
demonstrated in the laboratory (see Wobb and Whoaton, 
“Mantic Archetype Distribution Among Middle-Class Uni- 
versity Students,” J. Oneir. Psy. Pharm., XXIII, pg. 406— 
453). Because analogies with the ghost-life exist, this 
recurrence phenomenon is known, in the jargon, as “haunt- 
ing.” Whereas other sorts of hallucinations tend to flow by, 
related in deep ways that aren’t accessible to the casual 
dopefiend, these Oneirine hauntings show a definite nar- 
rative continuity, as clearly as, say, the average Reader's 
Digest article. Often they are so ordinary, so conven- 
tional—Jeaach calls them “the dullest hallucinations known 
to psychopharmacology”—that they are only recognized 
as hauntings through some radical though plausible viola- 
tion of possibility: the presence of the dead, journeys by 
the same route and means where one person will set out 
later but arrive earlier, a printed diagram which no 
amount of light will make readable.... On recognizing 


i: 


820 : Gravity’s RAINBOW 


that he is being haunted, the subject enters immediately 
into “phase two,” which, though varying in intensity from 
subject to subject, is always disagreeable: often sedation 
(0.6 mg atropine subcut.) will-be necessary, even though 
Oneirine is classified as a CNS depressant. 

About the paranoia often noted under the drug, there 
is nothing remarkable. Like other sorts of paranoia, it is 
nothing less than the onset, the leading edge, of the dis- 
covery that everything is connected, everything in the 
Creation, a secondary illumination—not yet blindingly 
One, but at least connected, and perhaps a route In for 
those like Tchitcherine who are held at the edge. ... 


TCHITCHERINE’S HAUNTING 


As to whether the man is or isn’t Nikolai Ripov: he 
does arrive the way Ripov is said to: heavy and inescap- 
able. He wants to talk, only to talk. But somehow, as they 
progress, into the indoor corridor-confusions of words, 
again and again he will trick Tchitcherine into uttering 
heresy, into damning himself. et 

“I’m here to help you see clearly. If you have doubts, 
we should air them, honestly, man to man. No reprisals. 
Hell, don’t you think I’ve had doubts? Even Sialin’s had 
them. We all have.” . 

“It’s all right though. It isn’t anything I can’t handle.” 

“But you're not handling it, or they wouldn't have sent 
me out here. Don’t you think they know when someone 
they care for is in trouble?” 

Tchitcherine doesn’t want to ask. He strains against it 
with the muscles of his heart-cage. The pain of cardiac 
neurosis goes throbbing down his left arm. But he asks, 
feeling his breath shift a little, “Was I supposed to die?” 

“When, Vaslav?” : 

“In the War.” 

“Oh, Vaslav.” | 

“You wanted to hear what was troubling me.” 

“But don’t you see how they'll take ? Come, bring 
it all the way out. We lost twenty. million souls, Vaslav. 
It’s not an accusation you can make lightly. They’d want 
documentation. Even your life might be in danger—” | 

“I’m not accusing anyone...please don’t...I only 
want to know if I am supposed to die for them.” 


The Counterforce 821 


“No one wants you to die.” Soothing. “Why do you 
think that?” 

So it is coaxed out of him by the patient emissary, 
whining, desperate, too many words—paranoid suspicions, 
unappeasable fears, damning himself, growing the capsule 
around his person that will isolate him from the com- 
munity forever.... 

“Yet that’s the very heart of History,” the gentle voice 
talking across twilight, neither man having risen to light a 
lamp. “The inmost heart. How could everything you know, 
all you’ve seen and touched of it, be fed by a lie?” 

“But life after death...” 

“There is no life after death.” 

Tchitcherine means he’s had to fight to believe in his 
mortality. As his body fought to accept its steel. Fight 
down all his hopes, fight his way into the bitterest of free- 
doms. Not till recently did he come to look for comfort 
in the dialectical ballet of force, counterforce, collision, 
and new order—not till the War came and Death appeared 
across the ring, Tchitcherine’s first glimpse after the years 
of training: taller, more beautifully muscled, less waste 
motion than he’d ever expected—only in the ring, feeling 
the terrible cold each blow brought with it, only then did 
he turn to a Theory of History—of all pathetic cold com- 
forts—to try and make sense of it. 

“The Americans say, “There are no atheists in foxholes.’ 
You were never of the faith, Vaslav. You had a deathbed 
conversion, out of fear.” 

» “Ts that why you want me dead now?” 

“Not dead. You're not rauch use dead.” Two more 
olive-drab agents have come in, and stand watching 
Tchitcherine. They have regular, unremarkable faces. This 
is, after all, an Oneirine haunting. Mellow, ordinary. The 
only tipoff to its unreality is— 

The radical-though-plausible-violation-of-reality— 

_ All three men are smiling at him now. There is no vio- 
lation, 

It’s a scream, but it comes out as a roar. He leaps at 


_ Ripov, nearly nails him with his fist too, but the. others, 


with faster reflexes than he counted on, have come up 
either side to hold him. He can’t believe their strength. 
Through the nerves of hip and ass he feels his Nagant 


being slid from its holster, and feels his own cock sliding 


A 


822 Gravity's RAINBOW 


out of a German girl he can’t remember now, on the last 
sweetwine morning he saw her, in the last warm bed of 
the last morning departure.... 

“You're a child, Vaslav. Only making believe that you 
understand ideas which are really beyond you. We have 
to speak very simply for you.” 

In Central Asia he was told of the functions of Moslem 
angels. One is the examine the recently dead. After the 
last mourner has gone, angels come to the grave and 
interrogate the dead one in his faith. ... 

There is another figure now, at the edge of the room. 
She is Tchitcherine’s age, and in uniform. Her eyes don’t 
want to say anything to Tchitcherine. She only watches. 
No music heard, no summer journey taken ...no horse 
seen against the steppe in the last daylight. ... 

He doesn’t recognize her. Not that it matters. Not at 
this level of things. But it’s Galina, come back to the 
cities, out of the silences after all, in again to the chain- 
link fields of the Word, shining, running secure and always 
close enough, always tangible. ... 

“Why were you hunting your black brother?” Ripov 
manages to make the question sound courteous. 

Oh. Nice of you to ask, Ripov. Why was I? “When it 
began...a long time ago—at first...I thought I was 
being punished, Passed over. I blamed him.” 

“Now?” 

“I don’t know.” 

“What made you think he was your target?” 

“Who else’s would he be?” 

“Vaslav. Will you never rise above? These are old bar- 
barisms. Blood lines, personal revenge. You think this has 
all been arranged for you, to ease your little, stupid lusts.” 

All right. All right. “Yes. Probably. What of it?” 

“He isn’t your target. Others want him.” 

“So you've been letting me—” 

“So far. Yes.” . 

Dzabajev could have told you. That Siddexi Asiatic is 
first and last an enlisted man, He knew. Officers. Fucking 
officer mentality. You do all the work, then! they come in, 
to wrap it up, to get the glory. - 

“You're taking it away from me.” od 

“You can go home.” 


The Counterforce 823 


Tchitcherine has been watching the other two. He sees” 
now that they are in American uniform, and probably 
haven't understood a word. He holds out his empty hands, 
his sunburned wrists, for a last application of steel. Ripov, 
in the act of turning to leave, appears surprised. “Oh. No, 
no. You have thirty days’ survivor’s leave. You have sur- 
vived, Vaslav. You're to report to TsAGI when you get - 
back to Moscow, that’s all, There'll be another assignment. 
We'll be taking German rocket personnel out to the desert. 
To Central Asia. I imagine they'll need an old Central 
Asia hand out there.” 

Tchitcherine understands that in his dialectic, his own 
ede unfolding, to return to Central Asia is, operationally, 
to die. 

They have gone. The woman’s iron face, at the very 
last, did not turn back. He is alone in a gutted room, with 
the plastic family toothbrushes still in their holders on the 
wall, melted, strung downward in tendrils of many colors, 
bristles pointing to every black plane and corner and 
soot-blinded. window. 


Oo 


The dearest nation of all is one that will survive no longer than 
you and I, a common movement at the mercy of death and time: 
the ad hoc adventure. 


_ Resolutions of the Gross Suckling Conference 


North? What searcher has ever been directed north? What 
youre supposed to be looking for lies south—those dusky 
natives, right? For danger and enterprise they send you 
west, for visions, east. But what’s north? 
The escape route of the Anubis. 
The Kirghiz Light. 
The Herero country of death. 
Ensign Morituri, Carroll Eventyr, Thomas Gwenhidwy, 
and Roger Mexico are sitting at a table on the redbrick 
_ terrace of Der Grob Saugling, an inn by the edge of a 
little blue Holstein lake. The sun makes the water sparkle. 
_ The housetops are red, the steeples are white. Everything 
is miniature, neat, gently pastoral, locked into the rise 


“ 


824 Graviry’s RaInsow 


and fall of seasons. Contrasting wood Xs on closed doors. 
The brink of autumn. A cow sez moo, The milkmaid farts 
at the milk pail, which echoes with a very slight clang, 
and the geese honk or hiss. The four envoys drink watered 
Moselle and talk mandalas. 

The Rocket was fired southward, westward, eastward. 
But not northward—not so far. Fired south, at Antwerp, 
the bearing was about 173°. East, during testing at Peene- 
miinde, 072°, Fired west, at London, about 260°. Work- 
ing it out with the parallel rulers, the missing (or, if you 
want, “resultant”) bearing comes out to something like 
354°. This would be the firing implied by all the others, a 
ghost-firing which, in the logic of mandalas, either has oc- 
curred, most-secretly, or will occur. 

So the conferees at the Gross Suckling Conference here, 
as it will come to be known, sit around a map with their 
instruments, cigarettes and speculations. Sneer not. Here is 
one of the great deductive moments in postwar intelligence. 
Mexico is holding out for a weighting system to make 
vector lengths proportional to the actual number of firings 
along each one. Thomas Gwenhidwy, ever sensitive to 
events in geographical space, wants to take the 1944 
Blizna firings (also eastward) into account, which would 
pull the arrow northward from 354°—and even closer to - 
true north if the firings at London and Norwich from 
Walcheren and Staveren are also included. 

Evidence and intuition—and maybe a residue of un- 
civilizable terror that lies inside us, every one—point to 
000°; true North. What better direction to fire the ooo0o0P 

Trouble is, what good’s a bearing, even a mythic-sym- 
metric bearing, without knowing where the Rocket was 
fired from to begin with? You have a razor-edge, 280 km 
long, sweeping east/west across the Zone’s pocked face, 
endlessly sweeping, obsessive, dithering, glittering, unbear- 
able, never coming to rest. . 

Well, Under The Sign Of The Gross heen ae Gwabing 
full-color picture of a loathsomely fat drooling infant. In 
one puddinglike fist the Gross Suckling clutches a dripping 
hamhock (sorry pigs, nothing personal), with the other 
he reaches out for a human Mother’s Nipple that emerges 
out into the picture from the left-hand side, his gaze ar- _ 
rested by the approaching tit, his mouth open—a gleeful — 


The Counterforce 825 


look, teeth pointed and itching, a glaze of FOODmunch- 
munchyesgobblemmm over his eyes. Der Grob Saugling, 
23rd card of the Zone’s trumps major.... . 

Roger likes to think of it as a snap of Jeremy as a child. 
Jeremy, who Knows All, has forgiven Jessica her time with 
Roger. He’s had an outing or two himself, and can under- 
stand, he’s of liberal mind, the War after all has taken 
down certain barriers, Victorianisms you might say (a tale 
brought to. you by the same jokers who invented the 
famous Polyvinyl Chloride Raincoat)....and what’s this, 
Roger, he’s trying to impress you? his eyelids make high, 
amiable crescents as he leans forward (smaller chap than 
Roger thought) clutching his glass, sucking on the most 
tasteless Pipe Roger has eyer seen, a reproduction in brier 
of Winston Churchill's head for a bowl, no detail is spared, 
even a cigar in its mouth with a little hole drilled down it 
so that some of the smoke can actually seep out the end 
-+-it is a servicemen’s pub in Cuxhaven here, the place 
used to be a marine salvage yard, so the lonesome soldiers 
sit dreaming and drinking among all that nautical junk, 
not at the same level as in one’s usual outdoor café, no, 
some are up in tilted hatchways, or dangling in boat- 
‘swain’s chairs, crow’s-nests, sitting over their bitter. among 
the chain, tackle, strakework, black iron fittings. It’s night. 
Lanterns have been brought out to the tables. Soft little 
nocturnal waves hush on the shingle. Late waterfowl cry 
out over the lake. 

“But will it ever get us, Jeremy, you and me, that’s the 
quesshun....” Mexico has been uttering these oracular— 
often, as at the Club today for lunch, quite embarrassing— 
bits of his ever since he showed up. 

“Er, will what ever get me, old chap?” It’s been old 
chap all day. 

“Haven't—ch’ever felt something wanted to gesh you, 
Jeremy?” 

“Get me.” He’s drunk. He’s insane. I obviously can’t let 
him near Jessica these math chaps they’re like oboe players 
it affects the brain or something. ... 

Aha, but, once a month, Jeremy, even Jeremy, dreams: 
about a gambling debt . . . different sorts of Collectors keep 
arriving... he cannot remember the debt, the opponent 
he lost to, even the game. He senses a great organization 


\ oa 


826 Gravity’s RAInBow 


behind these emissaries. Its threats are always left open, 
left for Jeremy to complete... each time, terror has come 
welling up through the gap, crystal terror... . 

Good, good. The other sure-fire calibration test has al- 
ready been sprung on Jeremy—at a prearranged spot in a 
park, two unemployed Augustes leap out in whiteface and 
working-clothes, and commence belting each other with 
gigantic (7 or 8 feet long) foam rubber penises, cunningly 
detailed, all in natural color. These phancy phalli have 
proven to be a good investment, Roger and Seaman Bo- 
dine (when he’s in town) have outdrawn the ENSA shows. 
It is a fine source of spare change—multitudes will gather 
at the edges of these north German villages to watch the 
two zanies whack away. Granaries, mostly empty, poke up 
above the rooftops now and then, stretching a wood gal- 
lowsarm against the afternoon sky. Soldiers, civilians, and 
children, There is a lot of laughter. 

Seems people can be reminded of Titans and Fathers, 
and laugh. It isn’t as funny as a pie in the face, but it’s at 
least as pure. 

Yes, giant rubber cocks are here to stay as part of the 
arsenal. . 

What Jessica said—hair much shorter, wearing a darker 
mouth of different outline, harder lipstick, her typewriter 
banking in a phalanx of letters between them—was: 
“We're going to be married. We're trying very hard to 
have a baby.” 

All at once there is nothing but this asshole babwean 
Gravity and Roger. “I don’t care. Have his baby. I'll love 
you both—just come with me Jess, please...I need 
you. . 

She flips a red lever on her intercom. Far away a buzzer 
goes off. “Security.” Her voice is perfectly hard, the word 
still clap-echoing in the air as in through the screen door 
of the Quonset office with a smell of tide flats come the 
coppers, looking grim. Security. Her magic word, her spell 
against demons. 

“Jess—” shit is he going to cry? he can feel it building 
like an orgasm— 

Who saves him (or interferes with his orgasm)? Why, 
Jeremy himself. Old Beaver shows up and waves off the 
heat, who go surly, fangflashing back to masturbating into 


The Counterforce 827 


Crime Does Not Pay Comics, gazing dreamy at guardroom 
pinups of J. Edgar Hoover or whatever it was they were 
up to, and the romantic triangle are suddenly all to have 
lunch together at the Club. Lunch together? Is this Noel 
Coward or some shit? Jessica at the last minute is over- 
come by some fictitious female syndrome which both men 
guess to be morning-sickness, Roger figuring she'll do the 
most spiteful thing she can think of, Jeremy seeing it as a 
cute little private yoo-hoo for 2-hoo. So that leaves the 
fellas alone, to talk briskly about Operation Backfire, which 
is the British program to assemble some A4s and fire them 
out into the North Sea. What else are they going to talk 
about? a 

“Why?” Roger keeps asking, trying to piss Jeremy off. 
“Why do you want to put them together and fire them?” . 

“We've captured them, haven’t we? What does one do 
with a rocket?” 

“But why?” 

“Why?” Damn it, to see, obviously. Jessica tells me 
you re—ah—a math chap?” 

“Little sigma, times P of s-over-little-sigma, equals one 
over the square root of two pi, times e to the minus s 
squared over two little-sigma.squared.” 

“Good Lord.” Laughing, hastily checking out the room. 

“It is an old saying among my people.” 

Jeremy knows how to handle this. Roger is invited to 
dinner in the evening, an intimate informal party at the 
home of Stefan Utgarthaloki, an ex-member of manage- 
ment at the Krupp works here in Cuxhaven. “You're wel- 
come to bring a guest, of course,” gnaws the eager Beaver, 
“there’s a lot of snazzy NAAFIs about, it wouldn’t be too 
difficult for you to—” 

“Informal means lounge suit, eh?” interrupts Roger. 
Too bad, he hasn’t got one. The prospects of being nabbed 
tonight are good. A party that includes (a) an Operation 
Backfire figure, (b) a Krupp executive, must necessarily 
then include (c) at least one ear to the corporate grape- 
vine that’s heard of the Urinating Incident in Clive Moss- 
moon's office. If Roger only knew what Beaver and his 
friends really have in mind! 

He does take a guest: Seaman Bodine, who has caused 
to be brought him from the Panama Canal Zone (where 


' 


~ 


828 Gravity's RaInsow 


the lock workers wear them as a uniform, in amazing 
tropical-parrot combinations of yellow, green, lavender, 
vermilion) a zoot suit of unbelievable proportions—the 
pointed lapels have to be reinforced with coat-hanger 
stays because they extend so far outboard of the rest of 
the suit—undemeath his purple-on-purple satin shirt the 
natty tar is actually wearing a corset, squeezing his waist 
in to a sylphlike 42 inches to allow for the drastic sup- 
pression of the jacket, which then falls to Bodine’s knees 
quintuple-vented in yards of kilt-style pleats that run clear 
back up over his ass. The pants are belted under his arm- 
pits and pegged down to something like ten inches, so he 
has to use hidden zippers to get his feet through. The 
whole suit is blue, not suit-blue, no—really BLUE: paint- 
blue. It is immediately noticed everywhere it goes. At 
gatherings it haunts the peripheral vision, making decent 
small-talk impossible. It is a suit that forces you either to 
reflect on matters as primary as its color, or feel super- 
ficial. A subversive garment, all right. 

“Just you and me, podner?” sez Bodine. “Ain’t that kind 
of cutting it a little close?” 

“Listen,” Roger chuckling unhealthily at what's also 
just occurred to him, “we can’t even bring those big rubber 
cocks along. Tonite, we’re going to have to use our wits!” 

“Tell you what, I'll just send a motorcycle out to Putzi's, 
round us up a goon squad, and—” 

“You know what? You’ve lost your sense of adventure. 
Yeh. You didn’t use to be like this, you know.” 

“Look old buddy,” pronouncing it in Navy Dialect: 
buddih, “c’mon, buddih. Putcherself in my shoes.” . 

“I might, if they weren't... that...shade of yelow—”’ 

“Just a humble guy,” the swarthy doughboy of the deep 
scratching in his groin after an elusive crab with a horn 
finger, rippling the ballooning pleats and fabric of his 
trousers, “just a freckleface kid from Albert Lea, Minne- 
sota, down there on Route 69 where the speed limit’s 
lickety-split all night long, just tryin’ t’ make it in the Zone 
here, kind of a freckle-face kid used a safety pin through 
a cork for a catwhisker and stayed up jlistened to the 
voices coast to coast before I was 10 and none of them 
ever recommended gettin’ into any of them gang wars, 
buddih. Be glad you're still so fuckin’ naive, Rog, wait'll 


The Counterforce 829 


you see your first European-gangster hit, they like to use 
3 rounds: head, stomach, and heart. You dig that stomachP 
Over here stomach’s no second-class organ, podner ’n’ 
that’s a good autumn kind of thought to keep in mind.” 
i. didn’t you desert? That’s a death-sentence, isn’t 
it?” 
“Shit, I can square that. But I’m only a cog. Don’t go 
thinking I know everything. All I know is my trade. I can 
show you how to wash coke and assay it, I can feel a gem 
and tell you from the temperature if it’s a fake—the fake 
won't suck as much heat from your body, ‘glass is a re- 
luctant vampire,’ ancient dealers’ saying, a-and I can spot 
funnymoney easy as E on an eye chart, I got one of the 
best visual memories in the Zone—” So, Roger drags him 
off, monologuing, in his zoot suit, to the Krupp wingding. 
Coming in the door, first thing Bodine notices is this 
string quartet that’s playing tonight. The second violin 
happens to be Gustav Schlabone, Saure Bummer’s fre- 
quent unwelcome doping partner, “Captain Horror,” as he 
is affectionately but not inaccurately known around Der 
Platz—and playing viola is Gustav's accomplice in 
suicidally depressing everybody inside 100 meters’ radius 
wherever they drop in (who’s that tapping and giggling at 
your door, Fred and PhyllisP), André Omnopon, of the 
feathery Rilke mustaches and Porky Pig tattoo on stomach 
(which is becoming the “hep” thing lately: even back in 
the Zone of the Interior the American subdebs all think 
it’s swoony). Gustav and André are the Inner Voices to- 
night. Which is especially odd because on the program is 
the suppressed quartet from the Haydn Op. 76, the so- 
called “Kazoo” Quartet in G-Flat Minor, which gets its 
name from the Largo, cantabile e mesto movement, in 
which the Inner Voices are called to play kazoos instead 
of their usual instruments, creating problems of dynamics 
for cello and first violin that are unique in the literature. 
“You actually need to shift in places from a spiccato to a 
détaché,” Bodine rapidly talking a Corporate Wife of 
_ some sort across the room toward the free-lunch table piled 
with lobster hors d’oeuvres and capon sandwiches—‘less 
bow, higher up you understand, soften it—then there’s also 
about a thousand ppp-to-fff blasts, but only the one, the 
notorious One, going the other way....” Indeed, one rea- 


830 Graviry’s Ramnsow 


son for the work’s suppression in this subversive use of 
sudden fff quieting to ppp. It’s the touch of the wander- 
ing sound-shadow, the Brennschluss of the Sun. They 
don’t want you listening to too much of that stuff—at least 
not the way Haydn presents it (a strange lapse in the 
revered composer’s behavior): cello, violin, alto and treble 
kazoos all rollicking along in a tune sounds like a song 
from the movie Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, “You Should 
See Me Dance the Polka,” when suddenly in the middle 
of an odd bar the kazoos just stop completely, and the 
Outer Voices fall to plucking a non-melody that tradition 
sez represents two 18th-century Village Idiots vibrating 
their lower lips. At each other, It goes on for 20, 40 bars, 
this feeb’s pizzicato, middle-line Kruppsters creak in the 
bowlegged velvet chairs, bibuhbuhbibuhbuh this does not 
sound like Haydn, Muttil Reps from ICI and GE angle 
their heads trying to read in the candlelight the little pro- 
grams lovingly hand-lettered by Utgarthaloki’s partner in 
life, Frau Utgarthaloki, nobody is certain what her first 
name is (which is ever so much help to Stefan because it 
keeps them all on the defensive with her). She is a blonde 
image of your mother dead: if you have ever seen her 
travestied in beaten gold, the cheeks curving too far, de- 
formed, the eyebrows too dark and whites too white, some 
zero indifference that in the end is truly evil in the way 
They've distorted her face, then you know the look: Nalline 
Slothrop just before her first martini is right here, in spirit, 
at this Kruppfest. So is her son Tyrone, but only because 
by now—early Virgo—he has become one plucked alba- 
tross. Plucked, hell—stripped. Scattered all over the Zone. 
It’s doubtful if he can ever be “found” again, in the con- 
ventional sense of “positively identified and detained,” 
Only feathers .. . redundant or regenerable organs, “which 
we would be tempted to classify under the ‘Hydra-Phi- 
_nomen’ were it not for the complete absence of hostil- 
ity...."—-Natasha Raum, “Regions of eterminacy in 
Albatross Anatomy,” Proceedings of the International So- 
ciety of Confessors to an Enthusiasm for Albatross No- 
sology, Winter 1936, great little magazine, they actually 
sent a correspondent to Spain that winter, to cover that, 
there are issues devoted entirely to analyses of world 
economics, all clearly relevant to problems of Albatross 


The Counterforce 831 


Nosology—does so-called “Night Worm” belong among 
the Pseudo-Goldstrassian Group, or is it properly con- 
sidered—indications being almost identical—a more in- 
sidious form of Mopp’s Hebdomeriasis? 

Well, if the Conference knew better what those cate- 
gories concealed, they might be in a better position to dis- 
arm, de-penis and dismantle the Man. But they don’t. 
Actually they do, but they don’t admit it. Sad but true. They 
are as schizoid, as double-minded in the massive presence of 
money, as any of the rest of us, and that’s the hard fact. 
The Man has a branch office in each of our brains, his 
corporate emblem is a white albatross, each local rep has a 
cover known as the Ego, and their mission in this world is 
Bad Shit. We do know what’s going on, and we let it go 
on. As long as we can see them, stare at them, those mas- 
sively moneyed, once in a while. As long as they allow us 
a glimpse, however rarely. We need that. And how they 
know it—how often, under what conditions. ... We ought 
to be seeing much popular-magazine coverage on the 
order of The Night Rog and Beaver Fought Over Jessica 
While She Cried in Krupp’s Arms, and drool over every 
blurry photo— 

Roger must have been dreaming for a minute here of 
the sweaty evenings of Thermidor: the failed Counter- 
force, the glamorous ex-rebels, half-suspected but still en- 
joying official immunity and sly love, cameraworthy wher- 
ever they carry on... doomed pet freaks. 

They will use us. We will help legitimize Them, though ~ 
They don’t need it really, it’s another dividend for Them, 
nice but not critical. ... 

Oh yes, isn’t that exactly what They'll do. Bringing 
Roger now, at a less than appropriate time and place here 
in the bosom of the Opposition, while his life’s first au- 
thentic love is squirming only to get home and take 
another wad of Jeremy’s sperm so they'll make their day’s 
quota—in the middle of all that he has to walk (ow, 
fuck) right into the interesting question, which is worse: 
living on as Their pet, or death? It is not a question he has 
ever imagined himself asking seriously. It has come by 
surprise, but there’s no sending it away now, he really 
does have to decide, and soon enough, plausibly soon, to 
feel the terror in his bowels. Terror he cannot think away. 


832 Graviry’s RAInsow 


He has to choose between his life and his death. Letting 
it sit for a while is no compromise, but a decision to live, 
on Their terms. . 

The viola is a ghost, grainy-brown, translucent, sighing 
in and out of the other Voices. Dynamic shifts "abound. 
Imperceptible lifts, platooning notes together or preparing 
for changes in loudness, what the Germans call “breath- 
pauses,” skitter among the phrases, Perhaps tonight it is 
due to the playing of Gustav and André, but after a while 
the listener starts actually hearing the pauses instead of 
the notes—his ear gets tickled the way your eye does 
staring at a recco map until bomb craters flip inside out to 
become muffins risen above the tin, or ridges fold to. val- 
leys, sea and land flicker across quicksilver edges—so the 
silences dance in this quartet. A-and wait’ll those kazoos 
come onl 

That’s the background music for what is to transpire. 
The plot against Roger has been formulated with shivering 
and giddy glee. Seamen Bodine is an unexpected bonus. 
Going in to dinner becomes a priestly procession, full of 
secret gestures and understandings. It is a very elaborate 
meal, according to the menu, full of relevés, poissons, 
entremets. “What’s this ‘Uberraschungbraten’ here?” Sea- 
man Bodine asks right-hand dinner companion Constance 
Flamp, loose-khakied newshound and toughtalkin’ sweet- 
heart of ev’ry GI from Iwo to Saint-Lé. 

“Why, just what it sez, Boats,” replies —— 
Connie,” “that’s German for ‘ surprise roast.’” 

m hep,” sez Bodine. She has—maybe not meaning 
aed with her eyes—perhaps, Pointsman, there is 
such a thing as the kindness-reflex (how many young men 
has she seen go down since ’42?) that now and then, also 
beyond the Zero, survives extinction.... Bodine looks 
down at the far end of the table, past corporate teeth and 
polished fingernails, past heavy monogrammed eating-tools, 
and for the first time notices a stone barbecue pit, with 
two. black iron hand-operated spits. Servants in their pre- 
war livery are busy layering scrap paper (old SHAEF 
directives, mostly), kindling, quartered pine logs, and coal, 
luscious fist-sized raven chunks of the kind that once left 
bodies up and down the sides of the canals, once, during 
the Inflation, when it was actually held that ‘mortally dear, 


; 
. 


ates : i eRE i 


The Counterforce 833 


imagine.... At the edge of the pit, with Justus about to 
light the taper, as Gretchen daintily laces the fuel with GI 
xylene from down in the dockyards, Seaman Bodine ob- 
serves Roger’s head, being held by four or six hands up- 
side down, the lips being torn away from the teeth and 
the high gums already draining white as a skull, while one 
of the maids, a classic satin-and-lace, impish, torturable 
young maid, brushes the teeth with American toothpaste, 
carefully scrubbing away the nicotine stains and tartar. 
Roger's eyes are so hurt and pleading.... All around, 
guests are whispering. “How quaint, Stefan’s even thought 
of head cheesel” “Oh, no, it’s another part I’m waiting to 
get my teeth in...” giggles, heavy breathing, and what’s 
that pair of very blue peg pants all ripped... and what's 
this staining the jacket, and what, up on the spit, red- 
dening to a fat-glazed crust, is turning, whose face is 
about to come rotating around, why it’s— 

“No ketchup, no ketchup,” the hirsute bluejacket search- 
ing agitatedly among the cruets and salvers, “seems to be 
no... what th’ fuck kind of a place is this, Rog,” yelling 
down slantwise across seven enemy faces, “hey, buddih 
you find any ketchup down there?” 

Ketchup’s a code word, okay— 

“Odd,” replies Roger, who clearly has seen exactly the 
same thing down at the pit, “I was just about to ask you 
the same question!” 

They are grinning at each other like fools. Their auras, 
for the record, are green. No shit. Not since’ winter of 
"42, in convoy in a North Atlantic gale, with accidental 
tons of loose 5-inch ammo rolling all over the ship, the 
German wolf pack invisibly knocking off sister ships right 
and left, at Battle Stations inside mount 51 listening to 
Pappy Hod tell disaster jokes, really funny ones, the whole 
gun crew clutching their stomachs hysterically, gasping for 
air—not since then has Seaman Bodine felt so high in the 
good chances of death. 

“Some layout, huh?” he calls. “Pretty good food!” Con- 
versation has fallen nearly silent. Politely curious faces 
are turning. Flames leap in the pit. They are not “sensi- 
tive flames,” but if they were they might be able now to 
detect the presence of Brigadier Pudding. He is now a 
member of the Counterforce, courtesy of Carroll Eventyr. 


\ 


Bs 


834 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


Courtesy is right. Séances with Pudding are at least as 
trying as the old Weekly Briefings back at “The White 
Visitation.” Pudding has even more of a mouth on him 
than he did alive. The sitters have begun to whine: 
“Aren't we ever to be rid of him?” But is is through 
Pudding’s devotion to culinary pranksterism that the re- 
pulsive stratagem that follows was devised. 

“Oh, I don’t know,” Roger elaborately casual, “I can’t 
seem to find any snot soup on the menu, ...” 

“Yeah, I could’ve done with some of that pus pudding, 
myself, Think there'll be any of that?” 

“No, but there might be a scum soufflé!” cries Roger, 
“with a side of—menstrual marmalade!” 

“Well I've got eyes for some of that rich, meaty 
smegma stew!” suggests Bodine, “Or howbout a clot 
casserole?” 

“I say,” murmurs a voice, indeterminate as to sex, down 
the table. 

“We could plan a better meal than this,” Roger waving 
the menu. “Start off with afterbirth appetizers, perhaps 
some clever little scab sandwiches with the crusts trimmed 
off of course... o-or booger biscuits! Mmm, yes, spread 
with mucus mayonnaise? and topped with a succulent bit 
of slime sausage... .” 

“Oh I see,” sez Commando Connie, “it has to be allitera- 
tive. How about...um... discharge dumplings?” 

“We're doing the soup course, babe,” sez cool Seaman 
Bodine, “so let me just suggest a canker consommé, or 

perhaps a barf bouillon.” 
- “Vomit vichyssoise,” sez Connie. 

“You got it.” , 

“Cyst salad,” Roger continues, “with little cheery-red 
Squares of abortion aspic, tossed in a subtle dandruff 
dressing.” 

There is a sound of well-bred gagging, and a regional 
sales manager for ICI leaves hurriedly, \spewing a long 
crescent of lumpy beige vomit that splatters across the 
parquetry. Napkins are being raised to faces all down the 
table. Silverware is being laid down, silver ringing the 
fields of white, a puzzling indecision here again, the same 
as at Clive Mossmoon’s office.... 4) 


ses 
On we go, through fart fondue (skillfully placed si: 


n 


The Counterforce 835 


bles of anal gas rising slowly through a rich cheese vis- 
cosity, yummm), boil blintzes, Vegetables Venereal _in 
slobber sauce. ... 

A kazoo stops playing. “Wart waffles!” Gustav screams. 

“Puke pancakes, with sweat syrup,” adds André Omno- 
pon, as Gustav resumes playing, the Outer Voices mean- 
time having broken off in confusion. 

“And spread with pinworm preserves,” murmurs the 
cellist, who is not above a bit of fun. 

“Hemorrhoid hash,” Connie banging her spoon in de- 
light, “bowel burgers!” 

Frau Utgarthaloki jumps to her feet, upsetting a platter 
of stuffed sores—beg pardon, no they’re deviled eggs—and 
runs from the room, sobbing tragically. Her suave metal 
husband also rises and follows, casting back at the trouble- 
makers virile stares that promise certain death. A discreet 
smell of vomit has begun to rise through the hanging 
tablecloth. Nervous laughter has long embrittled to bad- 
mouth whispering. 

“A choice of gangrene goulash, or some scrumptious 
_ creamy-white leprosy loaf,” Bodine in a light singsong 
_ “Te-pro-sy [down a third to] loaf,” playfully hounding the 
: holdouts, shaking a finger, c’mon ya little rascals, vomit 
_ for the nice zootster.... 

“Fungus fricassee!l” screams Roger the Rowdy. Jessica is 
_ weeping on the arm of Jeremy her gentleman, who is 
escorting her, stiff-armed, shaking his head at Roger’s 
folly, away forever. Does Roger have a second of pain 
right hereP Yes. Sure. You would too. You might even 
question the worth of your cause. But there are nosepick 
noodles to be served up buttery and steaming, grime gruel 
and pustule porridge to be ladled into the bowls of a 
sniveling generation of future executives, pubic popovers 
_ to be wheeled out onto the terraces stained by holocaust 
sky or growing rigid with autumn. 

“Carbuncle cutlets!” 

“With groin gravy!” 

“And ringworm relish!” 


N 


836 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


dwindled. No fat to feed them tonight. Sir Hannibal Grunt- 
Gobbinette is threatening, between spasms of yellow bile 
foaming out his nose, to bring the matter up in Parliament. 
“Tll see you two in the Scrubs if it kills me!” Well... 

A gentle, precarious soft-shoe out the door, Bodine way- 
ing his wide-brim gangster hat. Ta-ta, foax. The only guest 
still seated is Constance Flamp, who is still roaring out 
dessert possibilities: “Crotch custard! Phlegm fudgel Mold 
muffins!” Will she catch hell tomorrow. Pools of this and 
that glitter across the floor like water-mirages at the Sixth 
Antechamber to the Throne. Gustav and the rest of the 
quartet have abandoned Haydn and are all following 
Roger and Bodine out the door, kazoos and strings. accom- 
panying the Disgusting Duo: 


Oh gimme some o’ that acne, 4-la-mode, 
Eat so much-that Ah, jes’ ex-plodel 

Say there buddih you can chow all night, on 
Toe-jam tarts ’n’ Diarrhea Dee-lite. ... 


“I have to tell you,” Gustav whispering speedily, “I feel 
so awful about it, but perhaps you don’t want people like 
me, You see... I was a Storm Trooper. A long time ago. 
You know, like Horst Wessel.” 

“So?” Bodine’s laughing. “Maybe I was'a Melvin Purvis 
Junior G-Man.” 

“A what?” 

“For Post Toasties.” 

“For whom?” The German actually thinks Post Toasties 
is the name of some American Fiihrer, looking vaguely like 
Tom Mix or some other such longlip bridlejaw cowboy. © 

The last black butler opens the last door to the outside, 
and escape. Escape tonight. “Pimple pie with filth frost- 
ing, gentlemen,” he nods. And just at the other side of 
dawning, you can see a smile. . 

| 

* 

oO / 
In her pack, Geli Tripping brings along a few of Tchi- 
tcherine’s toenail clippings, a graying hair, a piece of bed- 
sheet with a trace of his sperm, all tied in a white kerchief, 


oe The Counterforce 837 


next to a bit of Adam and Eve root and a loaf of bread | 
baked from wheat she has rolled naked in and ground 
against the sun. She has left off tending her herd of toads 
on the witches’ hillsides, and has passed her white wand 
to another apprentice. She is off to find her gallant Attila. 
Now there are a good few hundred of these young women 
in the Zone who're smitten with love for Tchitcherine, all 
of them sharp as foxes, but none quite as stubborn as 
Geli—and none are witches. 

At noon she comes to a farmhouse with a floor of blue 
and white tiles in the kitchen, elaborate old china plates 
hung like pictures, and a rocking-chair, “Do you have a 
photo of him?” the old woman handing her a tin army 
plate with the remains of her morning’s Bauernfriihstiick. 
“I can give you a spell.” 

“Sometimes I can call up his face in a cup of tea. But 
the herbs have to be gathered carefully. I’m not that good 
at it yet.” 

“But you're in love. Technique is just a substitute for 
when you get older.” 

“Why not stay in love always?” 

The two women watch each other across the sunny 
kitchen. Cabinets with glass panes shine from the walls. 
Bees buzz outside the windows. Geli goes and pumps 
water from the well, and they brew some separ 
tea. But Tchitcherine’s face doesn’t appear. 

The night the blacks started off on their great Hoe 
Nordhausen felt like a city in a myth, under the threat of 
some special destruction—engulfment by a crystal lake, 
lava from the sky... for an evening, the sense of preserva- 
tion there was lost. The blacks, like the rockets in the 
Mittelwerke, had given Nordhausen continuity. Now the 
blacks are gone: Geli knows they are on collision course 
with Tchitcherine. She doesn’t want duels. Let the uni- 
versity boys duel. She wants her graying steel barbarian 
alive, She can’t bear to think that she may already have 
touched him, felt his.scarred and historied hands, for the _ 
last time. 
sae pushing her, is the town’s somnolence, and at 

t—the strange canaried nights of the Harz (where 
wy hustlers are busy shooting up female birds with 
sae hormones so they'll sing long enough to be sold to 


t f 


ae 


838 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


the foreign suckers who occupy the Zone)—full of too 
many spells, witch-rivalries, coven politics...she knows 
that’s not what magic is about. The Hexes-Stadt, with its 
holy mountains cropped in pale circles all up and down 
their green faces by the little tethered goats, has tumed 
into just another capital, where the only enterprise is 
administrating—the feeling there is of upstairs at the 
musicians’ union—no music, just glass-brick partitions, 
spittoons, indoor plants—no practicing witches left. You 
either come to the Brocken-complex with a bureaucratic 
career in mind, or you leave it, and choose the world. 
There are the two distinct sorts of witch, and Geli is the 
World-choosing sort. 

Here is the World. She is wearing gray men’s trousers 
rolled to the knee that flap around her thighs as she walks 
by the rye fields .. . walking, with her head down, pushing — 
hair out of her eyes often. Sometimes soldiers come by, 
and give her rides. She listens for news of Tchitcherine, 
of the trekking Schwarzkommando. If it feels right, she 
will even ask about Tchitcherine. The variety of the rumors — 
surprises her. I’m not the only one who loves him. 
though their love of course is friendly, admiring, unsexnela 

. Geli’s the only one in the Zone who loves him com-— 
pletely. Tchitcherine, known in some circles as “the Red 
Doper,” is about to be purged: the emissary is none other | § 
than Beria’s top man, the sinister N. Ripov himself. 

Bullshit, Tchitcherine’s already dead, didn’t you hear, 
he’s been dead for months . ve 

. they’ ve had somebody ‘impersonating him till all the 
others i in his Bloc are taken care of . 4 

. no, he came into Lineburg last weekend, my mate’s j 
séen sich before, no mistake, it’s him ; ; 

- he’s lost a lot of weight and takes a heavy body- — 
guard everywhere he goes. At least a dozen. Orientals — 
mostly... 4 

... fully equipped with Judas Iscariot no doubt. That — 
one’s hard to believe. A dozen? Where cial anybody find — 


that many people he can trust? Especially out at the 
edge like he is— . 

“What edge?” They're rattling along in the back of a 
2¥4-ton lorry through very green rolling country...a 
storm is blowing up mute purple, veined in yellow, behind © 


The Counterforce 839 


them. Geli’s been drinking wine with this scurvy lot of 
tommies, a demolition squad who've been out all day 
clearing canals. They smell of creosote, marsh-mud, am- 
monia from the dynamite. 

“Well you know what he’s doing.” 

“The rockets?” ; 

“I wouldn’t want to be in his place, that’s all.” 

Up on the crest of a hill, an army surveying party is 
restoring a damaged road. One silhouette leans peering 
through a transit, one holds a bob. A bit apart from the 
instrument man another engineer stands with his arms out 
straight to the sides, his head moves sighting along either 
pointed hand, then the arms swoop together...if you 
close your eyes, and have learned to let your arms move 
by themselves, your fingers will touch making a perfect 
right angle from where they were . . . Geli watches the tiny 
act: it is devotional, graceful, and she feels the cross the 
man has made on his own circle of visible earth... 
unconsciously a mandala...it is a sign for her. He is 
pointing her on her way. Later that evening she sees an 
eagle flying across the marshes, in the same direction. - 
It’s golden-dark, almost night. The region is lonely and 
Pan is very close. Geli has been to enough Sabbaths to 
handle it—she thinks. But what is a devil’s blue bite on 
the ass to the shrieking-outward, into stone resonance, 
where there is no good or evil, out in the luminous spaces 
Pan will carry her toP Is she ready yet for anything so 
real? The moon has risen. She sits now, at the same spot 
where she saw the eagle, waiting, waiting for something 
to come and take her. Have you ever waited for it? won- 
dering whether it will come from outside or inside? Finally 
past the futile guesses at what might happen... now and 
then re-erasing brain to keep it clean for the Visit... yes 
wasn't it close to here? remember didn’t you sneak away 
from camp to have a moment alone with What you felt 
stirring across the land...it was the equinox... green 
spring equal nights...canyons are opening up, at the 
bottoms are steaming fumaroles, steaming the tropical life 
there like greens in a pot, rank, dope-perfume, a hood of 
smell... human consciousness, that poor cripple, that 
deformed and doomed thing, is about to be born. This is 
the World just before men. Too violently pitched alive in 


hy | 


ie” 3 


840 Gravirty’s Ramnsow 


constant flow ever to be seen by men directly. They are 
meant only to look at it dead, in still strata, transputrefied 
to oil or coal. Alive, it was a threat: it was Titans, was an 
overpeaking of life so clangorous and mad, such a green 
corona about Earth’s body that some spoiler had to be 
brought in before it blew the Creation apart. So we, the 
crippled keepers, were sent out to multiply, to have do- 
minion. God’s spoilers. Us. Counter-revolutionaries. If is 
our mission to promote death. The way we kill, the way 
we die, being unique among the Creatures. It was some- 
thing we had to work on, historically and personally, To 
build from scratch up to its present status as reaction, 
nearly as strong as life, holding down the green uprising, 
But only nearly as strong, 

Only nearly, because of the defection rate. A few keep 
going over to the Titans every day, in their striving sub- 
creation (how can flesh tumble and flow so, and never be 
any less beautiful?), into the rests of the folk-song Death 
(empty stone rooms), out, and through, and down under 
the net, down to the uprising. 

In harsh-edged echo, Titans stir far below. They are all 
the presences we are not supposed to be seeing—wind 
gods, hilltop gods, sunset gods—that we train ourselves 
away from to keep from looking further even though 
enough of us do, leave Their electric voices behind in the 
twilight at the edge of the town and move into the con- 
stantly parted cloak of our nightwalk till 

Suddenly, Pan—leaping—its face too beautiful to bear, 
beautiful Serpent, its coils in rainbow lashings in the sky 
—into the sure bones of fright— 

Don’t walk home at night through the empty country. 
Don’t go into the forest when the light is too low, even 
too late in the afternoon—it will get you. Don’t sit by the 
tree like this, with your cheek against the bark. It is 
impossible in this moonlight to see if you are male or 
female now. Your hair spills, silver white. Your body under 
the gray cloth is so exactly vulnerable, so fated to 
degradation time and again. What if he wakes and finds 
you've gone? He is now always the same, awake or asleep 
—he never leaves the single dream, there are no more 


differences between the worlds: they have become one _ 


for him, Thanatz and Margherita may have been his last 


The Counterforce 841 


ties with the old. That may be why they stayed so long, 
it was his desperation, he wanted to hold on, he needed 
them... but when he looks at them now he doesn’t see 
them as often any more. They are also losing what reality 
they brought here, as Gottfried lost all of his to Blicero 
long ago. Now the boy moves image-to image, room to 
Toom, sometimes out of the action, sometimes part of it 
. .. whatever he has to do, he does. The day has its logic, 
its needs, no way for him to change it, leave it, or live 
outside it. He is helpless, he is sheltered secure. 

It’s only a matter of weeks, and everything will be over, 

Germany will have lost the War. The routines go on. The 
boy cannot imagine anything past the last surrender. If 
he and Blicero are separated, what will happen to the 
flow of days? 
_ Will Blicero die no please don’t let him die... . (But 
he will.) “You're going to survive me,” he whispers. Gott- 
fried kneels at his feet, wearing the dog collar. Both are in 
army clothes. It’s a long time since either of them dressed 
as a woman. It is important tonight they they both be 
men. “Ah, you're so smug, you little bastard... .” 

It is only another game isn’t it, another excuse for a 
whipping? Gottfried keeps silent. When Blicero wants an - 
answer, he says so. It happens often that he only wants 
to talk, and that may go on for hours. No one has ever 
talked to Gottfried before, not like this. His father uttered 
only commands, sentences, flat judgments. His mother was 
emotional, a great flow of love, frustration and secret ter- 
ror passed into him from her, but they never really talked. 
This is so more-than-real...he feels he must keep every 
word, that none must be lost. Blicero’s words have become 
precious to him. He understands that Blicero wants to 
give, without expecting anything back, give away what he 
loves. He believes that he exists for Blicero, even if the 
others have all ceased to, that in the new kingdom they 
pass through now, he is the only other living inhabitant. 
Was it this he expected to be taken by, taken into? 
Blicero’s seed, sputtering into the poisoned manure of his 
bowels... it is waste, yes, futility... but...as man and 
woman, coupled, are shaken to the teeth at their ap- 
proaches to the gates of life, hasn’t he also felt more, 
worshipfully more past these arrangements for penetration, 


v 


ee 
ot 
— 


842 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


the style, garments of flaying without passion, sheer hosiery 
perishable as the skin of a snake, custom manacles and 
chains to stand for the bondage he feels in his heart... 
all become theatre as he approached the gates of that 
Other Kingdom, felt the white gigantic muzzles some- 
where inside, expressionless beasts frozen white, pushing 
him away, the crust and mantle hum of mystery so beyond 
his poor hearing... there have to be these too, lovers 
whose genitals are consecrated to shit, to endings, to the 
desperate nights in the streets when connection proceeds 
out of all personal control, proceeds or fails, a gathering 
of fallen—as many in acts of death as in acts of life— 
or a sentence to be alone for another night.... Are they 
to be denied, passed over, all of them? 

On his approaches to it, taken inward again and again, 
Gottfried can only try to keep himself open, to loosen 
the sphincter of his soul. ... 

“And sometimes I dream of discovering the edge of 
the World. Finding that there is an end. My mountain 
gentian always knew. But it has cost me so much. 

“America was the edge of the World. A message for 
Europe, continent-sized, inescapable. Europe had found 
the site for its Kingdom of Death, that special Death the 
West had invented. Savages had their waste regions, 
Kalaharis, lakes so misty they could not see the other side. 
But Europe had gone deeper—into obsession, addiction, 
away from all the savage innocences. America was a gift 
from the invisible powers, a way of returning. But Europe 
refused it. It wasn’t Europe’s Original Sin—the latest 
name for that is Modem Analysis—but it happens that 
Subsequent Sin is harder to atone for. ; 

“In Africa, Asia, Amerindia, Oceania, Europe came and 
established its order of Analysis and Death. What it could 
not use, it killed or altered. In time the death-colonies 
grew strong enough to break away. But the impulse to 
empire, the mission to propagate death, the structure of it, 
kept on. Now we are in the last phase. American Death 
has come to occupy Europe. It has learned empire frorh 
its old metropolis. But now we have only the structure 
left us, none of the great rainbow plumes, no fittings of 
gold, no epic marches over alkali seas. The savages | 3 
other continents, corrupted but still resisting in the nam 


The Counterforce 843 


of life, have gone on despite everything... while Death 
and Europe are separate as ever, their love still uncon-_ 
summated. Death only rules here. It has never, in love, 
become one with.... 

“Ts the cycle over now, and a new one ready to begin? 
Will our new Edge, our new Deathkingdom, be the 
Moon? I dream of a great glass sphere, hollow and very 
high and far away...the colonists have learned to do 
without air, it’s vacuum inside and out... it’s understood 
the men won't ever retum...they are all men. There 
are ways for getting back, but so complicated, so at the 
mercy of language, that presence back on Earth is only 
temporary, and never ‘real’... passages out there are dan- 
‘ gerous, chances of falling so shining and deep. ... Gravity 
rules all the way out to the cold sphere, there is always 
the danger of falling. Inside the colony, the handful of 
men have a frosty appearance, hardly solid, no more alive 
than memories, nothing to touch...only their remote 
images, black and white film-images, grained, broken year 
after hoarfrost year out in the white latitudes, in empty 
colony, with only infrequent visits from the accidental, 
like me. ... 

“I wish I could recover it all. Those men had once been 
through a tragic day—ascent, fire, failure, blood. The 
events of that day, so long ago, had put them into exile 
forever...no, they weren't really spacemen. Out here, 
they wanted to dive between the worlds, to fall, turn, 
reach and swing on journeys curved through the shining, 
through the winter nights of space—their dreams were of 
rendezvous, of cosmic trapeze acts carried on in loneliness, 
in sterile grace, in certain knowledge that no one would 
ever be watching, that loved ones had been lost forever.... 

“The connections they hoped for would always miss by 
trillions of dark miles, by years of frozen silence. But I 
wanted to bring you back the story. I remember that you 
used to whisper me to sleep with stories of us one day 
living on the Moon...are you beyond that by now? 
You've got much older. Can you feel in your body how 

_ strongly I have infected you with my dying? I was meant 
to: when a certain time has come, I think that we are 
all meant to. Fathers are carriers of the virus of Death, 
and sons are the infected...and, so that the infection 


i 


844 Gravity’s Rainsow 


may be more certain, Death in its ingenuity has contrived 
to make the father and son beautiful to each other as 
Life has made male and female... oh Gottfried of course 
yes you are beautiful to me but I'm dying...1 want to 
get through it as honestly as I can, and your immortality 
rips at my heart—can’t you see why I might want to 
destroy that, oh that stupid clarity in your eyes... when 
I see you in morning and evening ranks, so open, so ready 
to take my sickness in and shelter it, shelter it inside your 
own little ignorant love. .... 

“Your love.” He nods several times. But his eyes are 
too dangerously spaced beyond the words, stunned ir- 
reversibly away from real Gottfried, away from the weak, 
the failed smells of real breath, by barriers stern and 
clear as ice, and hopeless as the one-way flow of European 
time.... 

“I want to break out—to leave this cycle of infection 
and death. I want to be taken in love: so taken that you 
and I, and death, and life, will be gathered, inseparable, 
into the radiance of what we would become. .. .” 

Gottfried kneels, numb, waiting, Blicero is looking. at 
him. Deeply: his face whiter than the boy has ever seen 
it. A raw spring wind beats the canvas of their tent. It’s 
near sunset. In a moment Blicero must go out to take 
evening reports. His hands rest near a mound of cigarette 
butts in a mess tray. His myopic witch’s eyes, through the 
thick lenses, may be looking into. Gottfried’s for the first 
time. Gottfried cannot look away. He knows, somehow, 
incompletely, that he has a decision to make... that 
Blicero expects something from him... but Blicero has 
always made the decisions. Why is he suddenly asking... 

It all poises here. Passageways of routine, still cogent 
enough, still herding us. through time... the iron rockets 
waiting outside...the birth-scream of the latest spring 
torn across rainy miles of Saxony, route-sides littered with 
last envelopes, stripped gears, seized bearings, rotted socks 
and skivvies fragrant now with fungus and mud. If there — 
is still hope for Gottfried here in this wind!beat moment, — 
then there is hope elsewhere. The scene itself must be read 
as a card: what is to come. Whatever has happened since 
to the figures in it (roughly drawn in soiled white, ost ie 


gray, spare as a sketch on a ruined wall) it is preserved, — 


The Counterforce 845 


though it has no name, and, like The Fool, no agreed 
assignment in the deck. 


O 


Here’s Enzian ramrodding his brand-new rocket through 
the night. When it rains, when the mist is heavy, before 
the watch can quite get tarps over, the glossy skin of the 
rocket is seen to’ve turned to dark slate. Perhaps, after 
all, just before the firing, it will be painted black. 

It is the 00001, the second in its series. 

Russian loudspeakers across the Elbe have called to 
you. American rumors have come jiving in to the fires at 
night and summoned, against the ground of your hopes, 
the -yellow American deserts, Red Indians, blue sky, 
green cactus. How did you feel about the old Rocket? Not 
now that it’s giving you job security, but back then—do 
you remember any more what it was wheeling them out 
by hand, a dozen of you that morning, a guard of honor 
in the simple encounter of your bodies with its inertia... 
all your faces drowning in the same selfless look—the 
moirés of personality softening, softening, each sweep of 
surf a little more out of focus till all has become subtle 
grades of cloud—all hatred, all love, wiped away for the 
short distance you had to push it over the winter berm, 
aging men in coatskirts flapping below your boottops, 
breaths in white spouts breaking turbulent as the waves 
behind you.... Where will you all go? What empires, 
what deserts? You caressed its body, brute, freezing 
through your gloves, here together without shame or reti- 
cence you twelve struggled, in love, on this Baltic shore— 
not Peenemiinde perhaps, not official Peenemiinde... but 
once, years ago... boys in white shirts and dark vests and 
caps ...on some beach, a children’s resort, when we were 
younger...at Test Stand VII the image, at last, you 
couldn’t leave—the way the wind smelled salt and dying, 
the sound of winter surf, the premonition of rain you could 
feel at the back of your neck, stirring in the clipped hairs. 
... At Test Stand VII, the holy place. 

But young men have all grown older, and there’s little 
color in the scene... they are pushing into the sun, the 


“e 


- 


a 


846 Gravity's RaInsow 


glare strikes them squinting and grinning, bright here as 
the morning shift at Siemens with the centaurs struggling 
high on the wall, the clock without numerals, bicycles 
squeaking, lunchpails and lunchbags and the lowered faces 
of the trudging dutiful streams of men and women into 
the dark openings... it resembles a Daguerreotype taken 
of early Raketen-Stadt by a forgotten photographer in 
1856: this is the picture, in fact, that killed him—he died 
a week later from mercury poisoning after inhaling fumes 
of the heated metal in his studio... well, he was a habitué 
of mercury fumes in moderate doses, he felt it did his 
brain some good, and that may account for pictures like 
“Der Raketen-Stadt”: it shows, from a height that is 
topographically impossible in Germany, the ceremonial 
City, fourfold as expected, an eerie precision to all lines 
and shadings architectural and human, built in mandalic 
form like a Herero village, overhead a magnificent sky, 
marble carried to a wildness of white billow and candes- 
cence... there seems to be building, or demolition, under 
way in various parts of the City, for nothing here remains 
the same, we can see the sweat in individual drops on the 
workers’ dark necks as they struggle down in the bone- 
damp cellars...a bag of cement has broken, and its 
separate motes hang in the light... the City will always 
be changing, new tire-treads in the dust, new cigarette 
wrappers in the garbage... engineering changes to the 
Rocket create new routes of supply, new living arrange- 
ments, reflected in traffic densities as viewed from this 
unusual height—there are indeed tables of Functions to. 
get from such City-changes to Rocket-modifications: no 
more than an extension, really, of the techniques by which 
Constance Babington-Smith and her colleagues at R. A. F. 
Medmenham discovered the Rocket back in 1943 in recco 
photographs of Peenemiinde. 
But remember if you loved it. If you did, how you loved 
it. And how much—after all you're used |to asking “how 
much,” used to measuring, to comparing, measurements, 
putting them into equations to find out how much more, 
how much of, how much when... and here in your com- 
mon drive to the sea feel as much as you wish of that 
dark double-minded love which is also shame, bravado, — 
engineers’ geopolitics—“spheres of influence” modified to 
toruses of Rocket range that are parabolic in section... 


¥ 


{ 


The Counterforce 847 


...not, as we might imagine, bounded below by the 
line of the Earth it “rises from” and the Earth it “strikes” 
No But Then You Never Really Thought It Was Did You 
Of Course It Begins Infinitely Below The Earth And Goes 
On Infinitely Back Into The Earth it’s only the peak that 
we are allowed to see, the break up through the surface, 
out of the other silent world, violently (a jet airplane crash- 
ing into faster-than-sound, some years later a spaceship 
crashing into faster-than-light) Remember The Password In 
The Zone This Week Is FASTER—THAN, THE-SPEED- 
OFLIGHT Speeding Up Your Voice Exponentially—Linear 
Exceptions Made Only In Case of Upper Respiratory Com- 
plaints, at each “end,” understand, a very large transfer of 
energy: breaking upward into this world, a controlled 
burning—breaking downward again, an uncontrolled ex- 
plosion ... this lack of symmetry leads to speculating that 
a presence, analogous to the Aether, flows through time, 
as the Aether flows through space. The assumption of a 
Vacuum in time tended to cut us off one from another. 
But an Aether sea to bear us world-to-world might bring 
us back a continuity, show us a kinder unverse, more easy- 
going.... 

So, yes yes this is a scholasticism here, Rocket state- 
cosmology...the Rocket does lead that way—among 
others—past these visible serpent coils that lash up above 
the surface of Earth in rainbow light, in steel tetany... 
these storms, these things of Earth’s deep breast we were 
never told... past them, through the violence, to'a num- 
bered cosmos, a quaint brownwood-paneled, Victorian 
kind of Brain War, as between quaternions and vector 
analysis in the 1880s—the nostalgia of Aether, the silver, 
pendulumed, stone-anchored, knurled-brass, filigreed ele- 
gantly functional shapes of your grandfathers. These sepia 
tones are here, certainly. But the Rocket has to be many 
things, it must answer to a number of different shapes in 
the dreams of those who touch it—in combat, in tunnel, 
on paper—it must survive heresies shining, unconfound- 
able...and heretics there will be: Gnostics who have 
been taken in a rush of wind and fire to chambers of the 
Rocket-throne... Kabbalists who study the Rocket as 
Torah, letter by letter—rivets, burner cap and brass rose, 
its text is theirs to permute and combine into new revela- 
tions, always unfolding . .. Manichaeans who see two Rock- 


Le 


848 Graviry’s RaInBow — 


ets, good and evil, who speak together in the sacred 
idiolalia of the Primal Twins (some say their names are 
Enzian and Blicero) of a good Rocket to take us to the 
stars, an evil Rocket for the World’s suicide, the two 
perpetually in struggle. 

But these heretics will be sought and the dominion of 
silence will enlarge as each one goes down... they will 
all be sought out. Each will have his personal Rocket. 
Stored in its target-seeker will be the heretic’s EEG, the 
spikes and susurrations of heartbeat, the ghost-blossomings 
of personal infrared, each Rocket will know its intended 
and hunt him, ride him a green-doped and silent hound, 
through our World, shining and pointed in the sky at his 
back, his guardian, executioner rushing in, rushing 
closer.... 

Here are the objectives. To make the run over tracks 
that may end abruptly at riverside or in carbonized train- 
yard, over roads even the unpaved alternates to which are 
patrolled now by Russian and British and American troops 
in a hardening occupation, a fear of winter bleaching the 
men all more formal, into braces of Attention they ignored 
during the summer, closer adherence now to the paper- 
work as colors of trees and brush begin their change, as 
purple blurs out over miles of heath, and nights come 
sooner. To have to stay out in the rains of early Virgo: 
the children who stowed away on the trek against all 
orders are down now with coughs and fevers, sniffling at 
night, hoarse little voices inside oversized uniform jackets. 
To brew tea for them from fennel, betony, Whitsun roses, 
sunflowers, mallow leaves—to loot sulfa drugs and peni- 
cillin. To avoid raising road-dust when the sun has dried 
the ruts and crowns again by noon. To sleep in the fields. 
To hide the rocket sections under haystacks, behind the 
single wall of a gutted railroad shed, among rainy willows 


down beside the river beds. To disperse at any alarm, or 


often at random, just. for drill—to flow like a net, down 


out of the Harz, up the ravines, sleeping in|the dry glazed 


spaces of deserted spas (official pain, official death watch-— 


ing all night from the porcelain eyes of statues), digging 
in nights’ perimeters, smelling pine needles boots and 
trench-shovels have crushed....To keep faith that it is 


| 


not trek this time, nor struggle, but truly Destiny, the | 


The Counterforce 849 


oooo1 sliding like an oiled bolt into the receivership of 
the railway system prepared for it last spring, a route only 
apparently in ruins, carefully crafted by the War, by 
special techniques of bombardment, to take this most 
immachinate of techniques, the Rocket—the Rocket, this 
most terribly potential of bombardments. . . . 

The oo0001 goes disassembled, in sections—warhead, 
guidance, fuel and oxidizer tanks, tail section. If they all 
make it to the firing site, it will have to be put back. 
together there. 

“Show me the society that never said, ‘I am created 
among men, ” Christian walks with Enzian in the fields 
above the encampment, “‘to protect you each from vio- 
lence, to give shelter in time of disaster——but Enzian, 
what protection is there? what can protect us from that,” 
gesturing down the valley at the yellow-gray camouflage 
netting they can both, X-ray eyed for this one journey, 
see through. ... 

Enzian and the younger man somehow have drifted 
into these long walks. Nothing deliberate on either side. 
Is this how successions occur? Each man is suspicious. But 
there are no more of the old uncomfortable silences. No 
competing. 

“It comes as the Revealer. Showing that no society can 
protect, never could—they are as foolish as shields of 
paper....” He must tell Christian everything he knows, 
everything he suspects or has dreamed. Proclaiming none 
of it for truth. But he must keep nothing back for himself. 
Nothing is his to keep. “They have lied to us. They can’t 
keep us from dying, so They lie to us about death. A coop- 
erative structure of lies. What have They ever given us 
in return for the trust, the love—They actually say ‘love’ 
—we're supposed to owe Them? Can They keep us from 
even catching cold? from lice, from being alone? from 
anything? Before the Rocket we went on believing, because 
we wanted to. But the Rocket can penetrate, from the 
sky, at any given point. Nowhere is safe. We can’t believe 

- any more. Not if we are still sane, and love the 
truth.” 

_“We are,” nods Christian. “We do.” He isn’t looking at 
Enzian to confirm it, either. 
“Yes.” 
\ 


i 


850 Gravity’s RAInsow 


“Then ...in the absence of faith...” 

One night, in the rain, their laager stops for the night at 
a deserted research station, where the Germans, close to 
the end of the War, were developing a sonic death-mirror. 
Tall paraboloids of concrete are staggered, white and 
monolithic, across the plain. The idea was to set off an 
explosion in front of the paraboloid, at the exact focal 
point. The concrete mirror would then throw back a 
perfect shock wave to destroy anything in its path. Thou- 
sands of guinea pigs, dogs and cows were experimentally 
blasted to death here—reams of death-curve data were 
compiled. But the project was a lemon. Only good at 
short range, and you rapidly came to a falloff point where 
the amount of explosives needed might as well be deployed 
some other way. Fog, wind, hardly visible ripples or snags 
in the terrain, anything less than perfect conditions, could 
ruin the shock wave’s deadly shape. Still, Enzian can en- 
vision a war, a place for them, “a desert. Lure your enemy 
to a desert. The Kalahari. Wait for the wind to die.” 

“Who would fight for a desert?” Katje wants to know. 
She’s wearing a hooded green slicker looks even too big 
for Enzian, * 

“In,” Christian squatting down, looking up at the pale 
curve of reflector they've come to the base of and have 
gathered at in the rain, sharing a smoke, taking a moment 
away from the rest of the trek, “not ‘for.’ What he’s 
saying is ‘in,’” ‘ ; 

Saves trouble later if you can get the Texts straight 
_ soon as they're spoken. “Thank you,” sez Oberst Enzian. 

A hundred meters away, huddled into another white 
paraboloid, watching them, is a fat kid in a gray tanker 
jacket. Out of its pocket peer two furry little bright eyes. 
It is fat Ludwig and his lost lemming Ursula—he has 
found her at last and after all and despite everything. For 
a week they have been drifting alongside the trek, just 
past visibility, pacing the Africans day by day... among 
trees at the tops of escarpments, at the) fires’ edges at 
night Ludwig is there, watching . . . accumu ting evidence, 
or terms of an equation...a boy and his lemming, out 
_ to see the Zone. Mostly what he’s seen is a lot of chewing 
gum and a lot of foreign cock. How else does a foot-loose — 
kid get by in the Zone these daysP Ursula is preserved, 


The Counterforce 851 


Ludwig has fallen into a fate worse than death and found 
it’s negotiable. So not all lemmings go over the cliff, and 
not all children are preserved against snuggling into the 
sin of profit. To expect any more, or less, of the Zone is 
to disagree with the terms of the Creation. 

When Enzian rides point he has the habit of falling into 
reveries, whether the driver is talking or not. In night 
without headlamps, a mist coarse enough to be falling, or 
now and then blown like a wet silk scarf in the face, inside 
and outside the same temperature and darkness, balances 
like these allow him to float just under waking, feet and 
arms bug-upwards pushing at the rubbery glass surface- 
tension between the two levels, sticking in it, dream- 
caressed at hands and feet become super-sensitive, a good — 
home-style horizontalless drowse. The engine of the stolen 
truck is muffled in old mattresses tied over the hood. 
Henryk the Hare, driving, keeps a leery eye on the tem- 
perature gauge. He’s called “the Hare” because he can 
never get messages right, as in the old Herero story. So 
reverences are dying. 

A figure slips into the road, flashlight circling slowly. 
Enzian unsnaps the isinglass window, leans out into the 
heavy mist, and calls “faster than the speed of light.” The 
figure waves him on. But in the last edge of Enzian’s 
glance back, in the light from the flash rain is sticking to 
the black face in big fat globules, sticking as water does 
to black grease-paint, but not to Herero skin— 

“Think we can make a U-turn here?” The shoulders are 
treacherous, and both men know it. Back in the direction 
of camp the line of slow-rolling lowlands is lit up by a 
thud of apricot light. 

“Shit,” Henryk the Hare jamming it in reverse, waiting 
for orders from _Enzian as they grind slowly backwards. 
The one with the flashlight may have been the only look- 
out, there may be no enemy concentration for miles. But— 

“There.” Beside the road, a prone body. It’s Mieczislav 
Omuzire, with a bad head wound. “Get him in, come on.” 
They load him into the back of the idling truck, and cover 
him with a shelter half. No time to find out how bad it is. 
The blackface sentry has vanished for good. From the 
direction they're backing in comes the stick-rattle of rifle 


852 Gravity's RaInsow 


“We're going into this backwards?” 

“Have you heard any mortar fire?” 

“Since the one? No.” 

“Andreas must have knocked it out then.” 

“Oh, they'll be all right, Nguarorerue. I’m worrying 
about us.” 

Orutyene dead. Okandio, Ekori, Omuzire wounded, 
Ekori critically. The hostiles were white. 

“How many?” 

“Dozen maybe.” 

“We can’t count on a safe perimeter—” blue-white 
flashlight blobbing ellipse-to-parabola across the shaking 
map, “till Braunschweig. If it’s still there.” Rain hits the 
map in loud spatters. 

“Where’s the railroad?” puts in Christian. He gets an 
interested look from Andreas. It’s mutual. There’s a good. 
deal of interest here lately. The railroad is 6 or 7 miles 
northwest. 

The people come empty their belongings next to the 
Rocket’s trailer rigs. Saplings are being axed down, each 
blow loud and carrying ...a frame is being constructed, 
bundles of clothing, pots and kettles stuffed here and there 
under the long tarpaulin between bent-sapling hoops, to 
simulate pieces of rocket. Andreas is calling, “All decoys 
muster by the cook wagon,” fishing in his pockets for the 
list he keeps. The decoy trek will move on northward, no 
violent shift in direction—the rest will angle east, back 
toward the Russian Army. If they get just close enough, 
the British and American armies may move more cau- 
tiously. It may be possible to ride the interface, like gliding 


at the edge of a thunderstorm... all the way to the end 


between armies East and West. 


bong... bong...tolling departure. Enzian looks up, 


quizzical. Andreas wants to say something. Finally: “Chris- 


tian goes with you, then?” 


“Yes?” Blinking under rain-beaded eyebrows. “Oh, for 


God’s sake, Andreas.” — - 


“Well? The decoys are supposed to make it too, right?” ae 


“Look, take him with you, if you want.” ei 
“I only wanted to find out,” Andreas shrugs, “what’s 
been settled.” hes 


i 
4 


Andreas sits dangling feet kicking heels against tailgate 


The Counterforce — : 853 


“You could have asked me. Nothing’s been ‘settled.’” 

“Maybe not by you. That’s your game. You think it'll 
preserve you. But it doesn’t work for us. We have to know 
what’s really going to happen.” 

Enzian kneels and begins to lift the heavy iron tailgate. 
He knows how phony it looks. Who will believe that in 
his heart he wants to belong to them out there, the vast 
Humility sleepless, dying, in pain tonight across the Zone? 
the preterite he loves, knowing he’s always to be a 
stranger. ... Chains rattle above him. When the edge of 
the gate is level with his chin, he looks up, into Andreas’s 
eyes. His arms are braced tight. His elbows ache. It is an 
offering. He wants to ask, How many others have written 
me off? Is there a fate only I’ve been kept blind to? But 
habits persist, in their own life. He struggles to his feet, 
silently, lifting the dead weight, slamming it into place. To- 
gether they slip bolts through at each comer. “See you 
there,” Enzian waves, and turns away. He swallows a tablet 
‘of German desoxyephedrine then pops in a stick of gum. 
Speed makes teeth grind, gum gets chewed by grinding 
teeth, chewing on gum is a technique, developed during 
the late War by women, to-keep from crying. Not that he 
wants to cry for the separation. He wants to cry for him- 
self: for what they all must believe is going to happen to 
him. The more they believe it, the better chance there is. 
His people are going to demolish him if they‘can.... 

Chomp, chomp, hmm good evening ladies, nice job on 
the lashings there Ljubica, chomp, how the head Mieczi- 
slav, bet they were surprised when the bullets bounced 
off! heh-heh chomp, chomp, evening “Sparks” (Ozohande) , 
anything from Hamburg yet on the liquid oxygen, damned 
Oururu better come through-ru, or we gonna have a bad- 
oe time trying to lay low till he do-ru—oh shit who’s 
that— 

It’s Josef Ombindi’s who it is, leader of the Empty Ones. 
But till he stopped smiling, for a few second there, 
Enzian thought it was Orutyene’s ghost. “The word is 
that the Okandio child was killed too.” 

- “Not so.” Chomp. . 

“She was my first try at preventing a birth.” 

“So you maintain a deadly interest in her,” chomp, 
chomp. He knows that’s not it, but the man annoys him. 


854 Gravity’s Rarnsow 


“Suicide is a freedom even the lowest enjoy. But you 
would deny that freedom to a people.” 

“No ideology. Tell me if your friend Oururu is going tc 
have the LOX generator ready to roll. Or if there is < 
funny surprise, instead, waiting for me in Hamburg.” 

“All right, no ideology. You would deny your people 
a freedom even you enjoy, Oberst Nguarorerue.” Smiling 
again like the ghost of the man who fell tonight. Probing 
for the spot, jabbing what? what? want to say what, 
Oberst?P till he sees the tiredness in Enzian’s face, and 
understands it is not a trick. “A freedom,” whispering 
smiling, a love song under black skies edged all around in 
acid orange, a commercial full of Cathar horror at the 
practice of imprisoning souls in the bodies of new-borns, 
“a freedom you may exercise soon. I hear your soul talking 
in its sleep. I know you better than anyone.” 

Chomp, chomp, oh I had to give him the watch lists 
didn’t I. Oh, am I a fool. Yes, he can choose the night.... 
“You're a hallucination, Ombindi,” putting just enough 
panic into his voice so that if it doesn’t work itl still be 
a good insult, “I’m projecting my own death-wish, and it 
comes out looking like you. Uglier than I ever dreamed.” 
Giving him the Spaceman Smile for a full 30 seconds, 
after only 10 seconds of which Ombindi has already begun 
to shift his eyes, sweat, press his lips together, look at the 
ground, turn away, look back, but Enzian prolongs it, no 
mercy tonight my people, Spaceman Smile turning every- 
thing inside a mile radius to frozen ice-cream colors NOW 
that we're all in the mood, how about installing the 
battery covers anyway, Djuro? That’s right; X-ray vision, 
saw right through the tarp, write it down as another 
miracle... you there Vlasta, take the next radio watch, 
forget what it says on the list, there’s never been any more 
than routine traffic logged with Hamburg, and I wanna 
know why, wanna know what does come through when 
Ombindi’s people are on watch... communication on the 
trek command frequency is by CW dots and dashes—no 
voices to betray. But operators swear they can tell the 
individual sending-hands. Vlasta is one of his best oper- 
ators, and she can do good hand-imitations of most of 
Ombindi’s people. Been practicing up, justin ‘casey «| - 

The others, who've been all along wondering if Enzian 


¥ 


; 


The Counterforce 855 


vas ever going to move on Ombindi, can tell now by the 
00k on his face and the way he’s walking through—So, 
vith little more than touches to the brim of his forage cap, | 
ignaling Plan So-and-So, the Ombindi people are quietly, — 
vithout violence, relieved of all watch duties. tonight, 
hough still keeping their weapons and ammo. No one has 
ver taken those away. There's no reason to. Enzian is 
© more vulnerable now than he ever was, which was 
lenty. 

The fat boy Ludwig is a white glowworm in the mist. 
the game is that he’s scouting for a vast white army, 
lways at his other flank, ready to come down off of the 
igh ground at a word from Ludwig, and smear the blacks 
nto the earth. But he would never call them down. He 
vould rather go with the trek, invisible. There is no 
wustling for him down there. Their journey doesn’t include 
im. They have somewhere to go. He feels he must go 
vith them, but separate, a stranger, no more or less at 
he mercy of the Zone.... 


O 


t’s a bridge over a stream. Very seldom will traffic come 
yy overhead. You can look up and see a whole slope of 
one-bearing trees rushing up darkly away from one side 
f the road. Trees creak in sorrow for the engineered 
vound through their terrain, their terrenity or earthhood. 
3rown trout flick by in the stream. Inside the culvert, 
ther shelterers have written on the damp arc of wall. Take 
ne, Stretchfoot, what keeps you? Nothing worse than 
hese days. You will be like gentle sleep. Isn’t it only 
leepP Please. Come soon— Private Rudolf. Effig, 12.iv.45. 
\ drawing in Commando blackface-grease, of a man look- 
ng closely at a flower. In the distance, or smaller, appears 
o be a woman, approaching. Or some kind of elf, or 
omething. The man isn’t looking at her (or it). In 
he middle distance are haystacks. The flower is shaped 
ike the cunt of a young girl. There is a luminary looking 
lown from the sky, a face on it totally at peace, like the 
Buddha’s. Underneath, someone else has written, in En- 
slish: Good drawing! Finish! and undermeath that, in 


856 Graviry’s RAINBOW 


another hand, It IS finished, you nit. And so are you. 
Nearby, in German, I loved you Lisele with all my heart 
—mno name, rank, unit or serial number. ... Initials, tic- 
tac-toe games you can tell were played alone, a game of 
hangman in which the mystery word was never filled in: 
GE — — RAT — ~ and the hanged body visible almost at the 
other end of the culvert, even this early in the day, be- 
cause it’s a narrow road, and no real gradient of shadow. 
A bicycle is incompletely hidden in the weeds at the side 
of the road. A late butterfly pale as an eyelid winks aim- 
lessly out over the stalks of new hay. High up on the 
slope, someone is swinging an ax-blade into a living tree 
-..and here is where and when the young witch finds 
Vaslav Tchitcherine at last. 
He’s sitting by the stream, not dejected, nor tranquil, - 
just waiting. A passive solenoid waiting to be sprung. At — 
her step, his head lifts, and he sees her. She is the first 
presence since last night he’s looked at and seen. Which © 
is her doing. The charm she recited then, fastening the 
silk crotch tom from her best underpants across the 
eyes of the doll, his eyes, Eastem and liquid, though they'd 
ee only sketched in clay with her long fingernail, was - 


May he be blind. now to all but me. May the burning 
sun of love shine in his eyes forever. May this, my own 
darkness, shelter him. By all the holy names of God, by 
the Angels Melchidael, Yahoel, Anafiel, and the great | 
Metatron, I conjure you, and all who are with you, to go 
and do my will. 4 

The secret is in the concentrating. She inhibits every- 
thing else: the moon, the wind in the junipers, the wild 


raised to the sky. j . ;: 
Later she. breaks a piece of the magic | bread in half, 
and eats one part, The other is for Tchitcherine. bees 
He takes the bread now. The stream rushes. A bi 
sings. 
Toward nightfall, the lovers lying naked on a co d 


The Counterforce 857 


grass bank, the sound of a convoy approaches on the 
little road. Tchitcherine pulls on his trousers and climbs 
up to see if he can beg some food, or cigarettes. The black 
faces pass by, mba-kayere, some glancing at him curiously, 
others too involved with their own exhaustion, or with 
keeping a tight guard on a covered wagon containing the 
warhead section of the 00001. Enzian on his motorcycle 
stops for a moment, mba-kayere, to talk to the scarred, 
unshaven white. Theyre in the middle of the bridge. They 
talk broken German. Tchitcherine manages to hustle half 
a pack of American cigarettes and three raw potatoes. The 
two men nod, not quite formally, not quite smiling, 
Enzian puts his bike in gear and returns to his journey. 
Tchitcherine lights a cigarette, watching them down the 
road, shivering in the dusk. Then he goes back to his 
young girl beside the stream. They will have to locate 
some firewood before all the light is gone. 

This is magic. Sure—but not necessarily fantasy. Cer- 
tainly not the first time a man has passed his brother by, 
at 5 edge of the evening, often forever, without know- 
ing it. 


| 


By now the City is grown so tall that elevators are long- 
haul affairs, with lounges inside: padded seats and benches, 
snack bars, newsstands where you can browse through a 
whole issue of Life between stops. For those faint hearts 
who first thing on entering seek out the Certificate of In- 
spection on the elevator wall, there are young women in 
green overseas caps, green velvet basques, and tapered 
yellowstripe trousers—a feminine zootsuit effect—who’ve 
been well-tutored in all kinds of elevator lore, and whose 
job it is to set you at ease. “In the early days,” pipes young 
Mindy Bloth of Carbon City, Ilinois, smiling vacantly 
away in profile, close by the brass moiré of diamond-blurs 
passing, passing in vertical thousands—her growing-up 
face, dreamy and practical as the. Queen of Cups, never 
quite looks for you, is always refracted away some set 
angle in the gold-brown medium between you... it’s 
moming, and the flower man at the rear of the elevator, 


\ 


858 Graviry’s RAInsow 


down a step or two, behind the little fountain, has brought 

lilacs and irises fresh and early—“before the Vertical 

Solution, all transport was, in effect, two-dimensional—ah, 

I can guess your question—” as a smile, familiar and un- 

refracted for this old elevator regular, passes between girl 

and heckler—*‘What about airplane flight, eh?’ That’s 
what you were going to ask wasn’t itl” as a matter of fact 

he was going to ask about the Rocket and everyone 

knows it, but the subject is under a curious taboo, and 

polite Mindy has brought in now a chance for actual 

violence, the violence of repression—the bleached colors 

of a September moming sky opposite the sunrise, and the 

filing-edge of a morning wind—into this intimate. cubic ; 
environment moving so smoothly upward through space — 
(a bubble rising through Castile soap where all around — 
it’s green lit by slow lightning), past levels already a- 
bustle with heads seething brighter than sperm and eggs — 
in the sea, past some levels left dark, unheated, somehow — 
forbidden, looking oddly wasted, levels where nobody's” 
been since the War aaaaa-ahhh! howling past, “a common 
aerodynamic effect,” explains patient Mindy, “involving 
our own boundary layer and the shape of the orifice as 
we pass it—” “Oh you mean that before we get to it,” 
hollers another heckler, “it’s a different shape?” “Yup, and 
after we go by it too, Mac,” Mindy brushes him off, 
broadly mugging the same thing with her mouth, purse-_ 
relax-smile—these jagged openings howling, hauling for- : 
lorn and downward, already stories gone beneath the 
soles of your shoes, a howl bent downward like a har- 
monica note—but why don’t any of the busy floors make a — 
sound going by? where the lights are shining warm as j 
Xmas-week parties, floors that beckon you into densities” 
of glass faceting or screening, good-natured: coffee-umn 
grousing, well golly, here goes another day, howdy Marie, 
where you ladies hiding the drawings on the SG-1... 
what do you mean Field Service has them... again? 
doesn’t Engineering Design have any rights, it’s like watch- 
ing your child run away, to see a piece of equipment get 
set out to the Field (Der Veld)..That it is. A broken heart, 
a mother’s prayer. ...Slowly, the voices of the Liibeck 
Hitler Youth Glee Club fade in behind (nowadays the 
boys sing at officers’ clubs all across the Zone under their 


The Counterforce 859 


road name, “The Lederhoseners.” They are dressed appro- 
priately, and sing—when the house feels right—with their 
backs turned to the audiences, their sly little faces turned 
over shoulders to flirt with the fighting men: 


But sharper than a Mother’s tears 
Are the beatings Mutti gave to me... 


with a beautifully coordinated wiggle then to each pair of 
buttocks gleaming through leather so: tight that the 
clenching of gluteal muscles is plainly visible, and you 
can bet there isn’t a cock in the room doesn’t stir at the 
sight, and scarcely an eye that can’t hallucinate that 
maternal birch smacking down across each naked ass, the 
delicious red lines, the stern and beautiful female face, 
smiling down through lowered lashes, only a glint of light 
off of each eye—when you were first learning to crawl, 
it was her calves and feet you saw the most of—they 
replaced her breasts as sources of strength, as you learned 
the smell of her leather shoes, and the sovereign smell 
rose as far as you could see—to her knees, perhaps— 
depending on fashion that year—to her thighs. You were 
infant in the presence of leather legs, leather feet. . .). 

“TIsn’t it possible,” Thanatz whispers, “that we all learned 
that classical fantasy at Mother’s knees? That somewhere 
tucked in the brain’s plush album is always a child in 
Fauntleroy clothes, a pretty French maid begging to be 
whipped?” 

Ludwig shifts his rather fat ass under Thanatz’s hand. 
Both have perimeters they are not supposed to cross. But 
they have crept away anyhow, to a piece of the interface, 
a cold thicket they’ve pounded down a space in the middle 
of, to lie on. “Ludwig, a little S and M never hurt 
anybody.” 

“Who said that?” 

“Sigmund Freud. How do I know? But why are we 
taught to feel reflexive shame whenever the subject comes 
up? Why will the Structure allow every other kind of 
sexual behavior but that one? Because submission and 
dominance are resources it needs for its very survival. 
They cannot be wasted in private sex. In any kind of sex. 
‘It needs our submission so that it may remain in power. 


\ 


860 Gravity’s Rainsow 


It needs our lusts after dominance so that it can co-opt 
us into its own power game. There is no joy in it, only 
power. I tell you, if S and M could be established uni- 
versally, at the family level, the State would wither away.” 

This is Sado-anarchism and Thanatz is its leading 
theoretician in the Zone these days, 

It is the Liineburg Heath, at last. Rendezvous was made 
last night with the groups carrying fuel and oxidizer 
tanks. The tail-section group has been on the radio all 
morning, trying to get a position fix, if the skies will only 
clear, So the assembly of the oo001 is occurring also in a 
geographical way, a Diaspora rumning backwards, seeds 
of exile flying inward in a modest view of gravitational 
collapse, of the Messiah gathering in the fallen sparks. ... 
Remember the story about the kid who hates kreplach? 
Hates and fears the dish, breaks out in these horrible green 
hives that shift in relief maps all across his body, in the 
mere presence of. kreplach. Kid’s mother takes him to the 
psychiatrist. “Fear of the unknown,” diagnoses this gray 
eminence, “let him watch you making the kreplach, that'll 
ease him into it.” Home to Mother’s kitchen, “Now,” sez 
Mother, “I’m going to make us a delicious surprise!” “Oh 
boy!” cries the kid, “that’s keen, Mom!” “See, now I’m sift- 
ing the flour and salt into a nice little pile.” “What’s that, 
Mom, hamburger? oh, boy!” “Hamburger, and onions. 
I'm frying them here, see, in this frying pan.” “Gee, I 
can hardly wait! This is exciting!) What’re ya doin’ now?” 
“Making a little volcano in the flour here, and breaki 
these eggs into it.” “Can I help ya mix it up? Oh, boy!” 
“Now, I'm going to roll the dough out, see? into a nice 
flat sheet, now I’m cutting it up into squares—” “This is 
terrif, Mom!” “Now I spoon some of the hamburger into 
this little square, and now I fold it over into a tri—” 
“GAAHHHHI!” screams the kid in absolute terror— 
“kreplach!” ; 

As some secrets were given to the Gypsies to preserve 
against centrifugal History, and some to the Kabbalists, 
the Templars, the Rosicrucians, so have this Secret of the 
Fearful Assembly, and others, found their ways inside the 
weatherless spaces of this or that Ethnic Joke. There is also. 
the story about Tyrone Slothrop, who was sent into the 
Zone to be present as his own assembly—perhaps, heavily 


The Counterforce 861 


‘paranoid voices have whispered, his time’s assembly—and. 
‘there ought to be a punch line to it, but there isn’t. The 
plan went wrong. He is being broken down instead, and 


cattered. His cards have been laid down, Celtic style, 
‘in the order suggested by Mr. A. E. Waite, laid out and 
‘read, but they are the cards of a tanker and feeb: they 
“point only to a long and scuffing future, to mediocrity 
(not only in his life but also, heh, heh, in his chroniclers 
'too, yes yes nothing like getting the 3 of Pentacles upside 
‘down covering the significator on the second try to send © 
you to the tube to watch a seventh rerun of the Takeshi 
and Ichizo Show, light a cigarette and try to forget the 
whole thing)—to no clear happiness or redeeming cata- 
_clysm, All his hopeful cards are reversed, most unhappily 
‘of all the Hanged Man, who is supposed to be upside 
as... to begin with, telling of his secret hopes and 
ears 
“There never was a Dr. Jamf,” opines world-renowned 

nalyst Mickey Wuxtry-Wuxtry—‘“Jamf was only a fiction, 
to help him explain what he felt so terribly, so immedi- 
ately in his genitals for those rockets each time exploding 
in the sky...to help him deny what he could not pos- 
sibly admit: ‘that he might be in love, in sexual love, with 
his, and his race’s, death. 

“These early Americans, in their way, were a fascinating 
‘combination of crude poet and psychic cripple. . 
_ “We were never that concerned with Slothrop qua 
‘Slothrop,” a spokesman for the Counterforce admitted re- 
cently i in an interview with the Wall Street Journal. 
_ INTERVIEWER: You mean, then, that he was more a 
‘rallying point. 
| SpPoxEsMAN: No, not even that. Opinion even at the 
‘start was divided. It was one of our fatal weaknesses. [I’m 
sure you want to hear about fatal weaknesses.] Some called 
him a “pretext.” Others felt that he was a genuine, point- 
“point microcosm. The Microcosmists, as you must know 
m the standard histories, leaped off to an early start. 
/e—it was.a very odd form of heretic-chasing, really. 
ross the Low Countries, in the summer. It went on in 
of windmills, marshlands where it was almost too 
to get a decent sight. I recall the time Christian 


862 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


coat our plumb-bob strings with. They shone in the twi- 
light. You’ve seen them holding bobs, hands character- 
istically gathered near the crotch. A dark figure with a 
stream of luminescent piss falling to the ground fifty 
meters away... “The Presence, pissing,” that became a 
standard joke on the apprentices. A Raketen-Stadt Charlie 
Noble, you might say....[Yes. A cute way of putting it. 
I am betraying them all... the worst of it is that I know 
what your editors want, exactly what they want. I am a 
traitor. I carry it with me. Your virus. Spread by your 
tireless Typhoid Marys, cruising the markets and the 
stations. We did manage to ambush some of them. Once 
we caught some in the Underground. It was terrible. My 
first action, my initiation. We chased them down the tun- 
nels. We could feel their fright. When the tunnels 
branched, we had only the treacherous acoustics of the 
Underground to go on. Chances were good for getting 
lost. There was almost no light. The rails gleamed, as they 
do aboveground on a rainy night, And the whispers then 
—the shadows who waited, hunched in angles at the 
maintenance stations, lying against the tunnel, walls, watch- 
ing the chase. “The end is too far,” they whispered. “Go 
back. There are no stops on this branch. The trains run. 
and the passengers ride miles of blank mustard walls, but 
there are no stops. It’s a long afternoon run...” Two of 
them got away. But we took the rest. Between two station 
marks, yellow crayon through the years of grease and 
passage, 1966 and 1971, I tasted my first blood. Do you’ 
want to put this part in?] We drank the blood of our 


enemies. That’s why you see Gnostics so hunted. The 
sacrament of the Eucharist is really drinking the blood of ; 
the enemy. The Grail, the Sangraal, is the bloody vehicle. 
Why else guard it so sacredly? Why should the black 
honor-guard ride half a continent, half a splintering 
Empire, stone night and winter day, if it's only for the 
touch of sweet lips on a humble bowl? No, it’s mortal sin. 
they're carrying: to swallow the enemy, down into the slick 
juicery to be taken in by all the cells. | Your officially 
defined “mortal sin,” that is. A sin against you. A section 
of your penal code, that’s all. [The true sin was yours: to 
interdict that union. To draw that line. To keep us worse 
than enemies, who are after all caught in the same fields of 


shit—to keep us strangers. 


‘The Counterforce 863 


_ We drank the blood of our enemies. The blood of our 
friends, we cherished. ] 


- Item S-1706.31, Fragment of Undershirt, U.S. Navy issue, with 
' brown stain assumed to be blood in shape of sword running lower 
' left to upper right. 


Not included in the Book of Memorabilia is this foot- 
note. The piece of cloth was given to Slothrop by Seaman 
Bodine, one night in the Chicago Bar. In a way, the eve- 
ning was a reprise of their first meeting. Bodine, smolder- 
ing fat reefer stuck in under the strings at the neck of 
his guitar, singing mournfully a song that’s part Roger 
Mexico’s and part some nameless sailor stuck in wartime 
San Diego: 


Last week I threw a pie at someone’s Momma, 

Last night I threw a party for my mind, 

Last thing I knew that 6:02 was screamin’ over my head, 
Or it might’ve been th’ 11:59... 


[Refrain]: 
Too many chain-link fences in the evening, 


Too many people shiverin’ in the rain, 
They tell me that you finally got around to have your 


baby, 
And it don’t look like I'll see your face again. 


Sometimes I wanna go back north, to Humboldt County— 
Sometimes I think I'll go back east, to see my kin... 
There’s times I think I almost could be happy, 

If I knew you thought about me, now and then.... 


Bodine has a siren-ring, the kind kids send away cereal 
boxtops for, cleverly arranged in his asshole so it can be 
operated at any time by blowing a fart of a certain mag- 
nitude. He’s gotten pretty good at punctuating his music 
with these farted WHEEEEeecee’s, working now at getting 
them in the right key, a brand-new reflex arc, ear-brain- 
hands-asshole, and a return toward innocence too. The 
merchants tonight are all dealing a bit slower. Sentimental 
Bodine thinks it’s because they're listening to his song. 
Maybe they are. Bales of fresh coca leaves just in 
from the Andes transform the place into some resonant 
Latin warehouse, on the eve of a revolution that never 


- Ff 
* os 


864 Gravity's Ramnsow : 


will come closer than smoke dirtying the sky above the 
cane, sometimes, in the long lace afternoons at the 
window.... Street urchins are into a Busy Elf Routine, 
wrapping each leaf around a betel nut, into a neat little 
packet for chewing. Their reddened fingers are living 
embers in the shadow. Seaman Bodine looks up suddenly, 
canny, unshaven face stung by all the smoke and unaware- 
ness in the room. He’s looking straight at Slothrop (being 
one of the few who can still see Slothrop as any sort of 
integral creature any more. Most of the others gave 
up long ago trying to hold him together, even as a con- 
cept—“It’s just got too remote” ’s what they usually say). 
Does Bodine now feel his own strength may someday 
soon not be enough either: that soon, like all the others, 
hell have to let goP But somebody's got to hold on, it 
can’t happen to all of us—no, that'd be too much.. . 
Rocketman, Rocketman. You poor fucker. 

“Here. Listen. I want you to have it. Understand? It’s 
yours.” 

Does he even hear any more? Com he see this cloth, 
this stainP 

“Look, I was there, in Chicago, when they ambushed 
him. I was there that night, right down the street from 
the Biograph, I heard the gunfire, everything. Shit, I was 
just a boot, I thought this was what liberty was all about, 
so I went running. Me.and half Chicago. Out of the bars, 
the toilets, the alleys, dames holding their skirts up so 
they could run faster, Missus Krodobbly who’s drinking 
her way through the Big Depression, waitin’ till the sun 
shines thru, and whatta you know, there’s half my gradu- 
ating class from Great Lakes, in dress blues with the 
same bedspring marks as mine, and there’s longtime hook- 
ers. and pockmark fags with breath smelling like the 
inside of a motorman’s glove, old ladies from Back of the 
Yards, subdebs just out of the movies with the sweat still 
cold on their thighs, gate, everybody was there. They were 
taking off clothes, tearing checks out of checkbooks, 
ripping off pieces of each other’s newspaper, just so they 
could soak up some of John Dillinger’ s | blood. We went 
crazy. The Agents didn’t stop us. Just stood with s 
still curling out of their muzzles while the people. ; ] 
went. down on that blood in the street. Moyhe I ba] 


\ a The Counterforce 865 


along without thinking. But there was something else. 
Something I must've needed...if you can hear me... 
that’s why I'm giving this to you. O.K.? That’s Dillinger’s 
blood there. Still warm when I got it. They wouldn’t want 
you thinking he was anything but a ‘common criminal’— 
but Their head’s so far up Their ass—he still did what he _ 
did. He went out socked Them right in the toilet privacy 
of Their banks. Who cares what he was thinking about, 
long as it didn’t get in the way? A-and it doesn’t even 
matter why we're doing this, either. Rocky? Yeah, what 
we need isn’t right reasons, but just the grace. The physi- 
cal grace to keep it working. Courage, brains, sure, O.K., 
but without that grace? forget it. Do you—please, are you 
listening? This thing here works. Really does. It worked for 
me, but I’m out of the Dumbo stage now, I can fly with- 
‘out it. But you. Rocky. You....” 

It wasn’t their last meeting, but later on there were 
always others around, doper-crises, resentments about 
burns real or intended, and by then, as he'd feared, 
Bodine was beginning, helpless, in shame, to let Slothrop 
‘go. In certain rushes now, when he sees white network 
‘being cast all directions on his field of vision, he under- 
stands it as an emblem of pain or death. He’s begun to 
‘spend more of his time with Trudi. Their friend Magda 
was picked up on first-degree mopery and taken back to 


i 


‘Leverkusen, and an overgrown back court where electric 


‘lines spit overhead, the dusty bricks sprout weeds from 
jthe cracks, shutters are always closed, grass and weeds 
‘turn to bitterest autumn floor. On certain days the wind 
brings aspirin-dust from the Bayer factory. The people 
inhale it, and grow more tranquil. 

= They both feel her absence. Bodine finds presently that 
his characteristic gross laugh, hyeugh, hyeugh, has grown 
nore German, tjachz, tjachz. He’s also taking on some of 
fagda’s old disguises. Good-natured and penetrable dis- 
ruises, as at a masked ball. It is a transvestism of caring, 
the first time in his life it’s happened. Though nobody 
asks, being too busy dealing, he reckons it’s all right. 

» Light in the sky is stretched and clear, exactly like taffy » 
no more than the first two pulls. 

Dying a weird death,” Slothrop’s Visitor by this time 
be scrawled lines of carbon on a wall, voices down 


866 Gravity’s RAInBow 


a chimney, some human being out on the road, “the 
object of life is to make sure you die a weird death. Tc 
make sure that however it finds you, it will find you unde 
very weird circumstances. To live that kind of life... .” 


Item S-1729.06, Bottle containing 7 cc. of May wine. Analysis 
indicates presence of woodruff herb, lemon and orange peel, 


Sprigs of woodruff, also known as Master of the Woods, 
were carried by the early Teutonic warriors. It gives suc- 
cess in battle. It appears that some part of Slothrop ran 
into the AWOL DiZabajev one night in the heart of down- 
town Niederschaumdorf. (Some believe that fragments of 
Slothrop have grown into consistent personae of their own. 
If so, there’s no telling which of the Zone’s present-day 
population are offshoots of his original scattering. There’s 
supposed to be a last photograph of him on the only record 
album ever put out by The Fool, an English rock group— 
seven musicians posed, in the arrogant style of the early 
Stones, near an old rocket-bomb site, out in the East End, 
or South of the River. It is spring, and French thyme 
blossoms in amazing white lacework across the cape of 
green that now hides and softens the true shape of the old 
rubble. There is no way to tell which of the faces is 
Slothrop’s: the only printed credit that might apply to him 
is “Harmonica, kazoo—a friend.” But knowing his Tarot, 
we would expect to look‘among the Humility, among the 
gray and preterite souls, to look for him adrift in the 
hostile light of the sky, the darkness of the sea. . . .) . 

Now there’s only a long cat’s-eye of bleak sunset left 
over the plain tonight, bright gray against a purple ceiling 
of clouds, with an iris of darker gray. It is displayed 
above, more than looking down on, this gathering of 
Dzabajev and his friends, Inside the town, a strange con- 
vention is under way. Village idiots from villages through- 
out Germany are streaming in (streaming from mouth as 
well as leaving behind high-pitched trails of color for the 
folks to point at in their absence). They are expected o 
pass a resolution tonight asking Great Britain for Com- 
monwealth status, and perhaps even to apply for member- 
ship in the UNO. Children in the parish schools are being’ 
asked to pray for their success. Can 13 years of Vatican 
collaboration have clarified the difference between what's 


The Counterforce . 867. 


holy and what is not? Another State is forming in the 
night, not without theatre and festivity. So tonight’s 
prevalence of Maitrinke, which DZabajev has managed to 
score several liters of. Let the village idiots celebrate. Let 
their holiness ripple into interference-patterns till it clog 
the lantern-light of the meeting hall. Let the. chorus line 
perform heroically: 16 ragged staring oldtimers who shuffle 
aimlessly about the stage, jerking off in unison, waggling 
penises in mock quarter-staffing, brandishing in twos and 
threes their green-leaved poles, exposing amazing chancres 
and lesions, going off in fountains of sperm strung with 
blood that splash over glazed trouser-pleats, dirt-colored 
jackets with pockets dangling like 60-year-old breasts, 
sockless ankles permanently stained with the dust of the 
little squares and the depopulated streets. Let them cheer 
and pound their seats, let the brotherly spit flow. Tonight 
the Dzabajev circle have acquired, through an ill-coordi- 
nated smash-and-grab at the home of Niederschaumdortf’s 
only doctor, a gigantic hypodermic syringe and needle. 
Tonight they will shoot wine. If the police are on the way, 
if far down the road certain savage ears can already pick 
up the rumble of an occupation convoy across the night 
kilometers, signaling past sight, past the first headlamp’s 
faintest scattering, the approach of danger, still no one 
here is likely to break the circle. The wine will operate 
on whatever happens. Didn’t you wake up to find a knife 
in your hand, your head down a toilet, the blur of a long 
sap about to smash your upper lip, and sink back down to 
the old red and capillaried nap where none of this could 
possibly be happening? and wake again to a woman 
screaming, again to the water of the canal freezing your 
drowned eye and ear, again to too many Fortresses diving 
down the sky, again, again... . But no, never real. 

A wine rush: a wine rush is defying gravity, finding 
yourself on the elevator ceiling as it rockets upward, and 
no way to get down. You separate in two, the basic Two, 
and each self is aware of the other. 


THe OccUPATION OF MINGEBOROUGH 


3 The trucks come rolling down the hill, where the State 
highway narrows, at about three in the afternoon. All 


ey 


868 Graviry’s Rainsow 


their headlights are on. Electric stare after stare topping 
the crest of the hill, between the maple trees. The noise 
is terrific. Gearboxes chatter as each truck hits the end of 
the grade, weary cries of “Double-clutch it, idiot!” come 
from under the canvas. An apple tree by the road is in 
blossom. The limbs are wet with this morning’s rain, dark 
and wet. Sitting under it, with anyone else but Slothrop, 
is a barelegged girl, blonde and brown as honey. Her name 
is Marjorie. Hogan will come home from the Pacific and 
court her, but he'll lose out to Pete Dufay. She and 
Dufay will have a daughter named Kim, and Kim will 
have her braids dipped in the school inkwells by young 
Hogan, Jr. It will all go on, occupation or not, with or 
without Uncle Tyrone. 

There’s more rain in the air. The soldiers are mustering 
by Hicks’s Garage. In the back lot is a greasy dump, a pit, — 
full of ball-bearings, clutch plates, and pieces of trans- 
mission. In the parking lot below—shared with the green- 
trimmed candy store, where he waited for the first slice 
of very yellow schoolbus to appear each 3:15 around the 
comer, and knew which high-school kids were easy marks — 
for pennies—are six or seven old Cord automobiles, in — 
different stages of dustiness and breakdown. Souvenirs of — 
young empire, they shine like hearses now in the premoni- — 
tion of rain. Work details aré already putting up barri- 
cades, and a scavenging party has invaded the gray 
clapboards of Pizzini’s Store, standing big as a barn on the 
comer. Kids hanging around the loading platform, eating 
sunflower seeds out of burlap sacks, listen to the soldiers — 
liberating sides of beef from Pizzini’s freezer. If Slothrop — 
wants to get home from here, he has to slide into a path- 
way next to the two-story brick wall of Hicks’s Garage, a 
green path whose entrance is concealed behind the trash- 
fire of the store, and the frame shed where Pizzini keeps’ 
his delivery truck. You cut through two lots which aren’t 
platted exactly back to back, so that actually you're skirt- 
ing one fence and using a driveway. They are both amber 
and. black old ladies’ houses, full of cats alive or stuffed, 
stained lampshades, antimacassars and doilies on all the 
chairs and tables, and a terminal gloom, You have to 
cross a street then, go down Mrs. Snodd’s driveway beside 
the hollyhocks, through a wire gate and Santora’s ba 


The Counterforce 869 


yeiee over the rail fence where the hedge stops, across 
your own street, and home. . 

But there is the occupation. They may already have 
interdicted the kids’ short cuts along with the grown-up 
routes. It may be too late to get home. 


Back In DER PLATZ 


Gustay and André, back from Cuxhaven, have un- — 
screwed the reed-holder and reed from André’s kazoo and 
replaced them with tinfoil—punched holes in the tinfoil, 
and are now smoking hashish out. of the kazoo, finger- 
valving the small end pa-pa-pah to carburete the smoke— 
turns out sly Saure has had ex-Peenemiinde engineers, 
propulsion-group people, working on a long-term study of 
optimum hashpipe design, and guess what—in terms of 
flow rate, heat-transfer, control of air-to-smoke ratio, the 
perfect shape turns out to be that of the classical kazoo! 

Yeah, another odd thing about the kazoo: the knuckle- 
thread above the reed there is exactly the same as a thread 
in a light-bulb socket. Gustav, good old Captain Horror, 
wearing a liberated pair of very yellow English shooting- 
glasses (“Helps you find the vein easier, I guess”), likes to 
proclaim this as the clear signature of Phoebus. “You fools 
think the kazoo is a subversive instrument? Here—” he 
always packs a light bulb on his daily rounds, no use 
passing up an opportunity to depress the odd dopefiend 

.. deftly screwing the light bulb flush against the reed, 
muting it out, “You see? Phoebus is even behind the 
kazoo. Hal hal hal” Schadenfreude, worse than a pro- 
longed onion fart, seeps through the room. 

But what Gustav's light bulb—none other than our 
friend Byron—wants to say is no, it’s not that way at all, 
it’s a declaration of brotherhood by the Kazoo for all the 
captive and oppressed light bulbs. . . 

There is a movie going on, under the rug. On the floor, 
24 hours a day, pull back the rug sure enough there’s that 

_damn movie! A really offensive and tasteless film by Ger- 
hardt von Goll, daily rushes in fact from a project which 
will never be completed. Springer just plans to keep it 
going indefinitely there, under the rug. The title is New 
Sled and that’s what it’s about, a brand new kind of 


870 Graviry’s RAINBow 


dope that nobody’s ever heard of. One of the most annoy- 
ing characteristics of the shit is that the minute you take 
it you are rendered incapable of ever telling anybody 
what it’s like, or worse, where to get any. Dealers are as 
in the dark as anybody. All you can hope is that you ll 
come across somebody in the act of taking (shooting? 
smoking? swallowing?) some. It is the dope that finds 
you, apparently. Part of a reverse world whose agents run 
around with guns which are like vacuum cleaners operat- 
ing in the direction of life—pull the trigger and bullets 
are sucked back out of the recently dead into the barrel, 
and the Great Irreversible is actually reversed as the 
corpse comes to life to the accompaniment of a backwards 
gunshot (you can imagine what drug-ravaged and mind- 
less idea of fun the daily sound editing on this turns out 
to be). Titles fash on such as 


GERHARDT VON GOLL BECOMES SODIUM AMYTAL FREAK! 


And here he is himself, the big ham, sitting on the toilet, 
a... well what appears to be an unusually large infant’s 
training toilet, up between the sitter’s legs rises the por- 
celain head of a jackal with what, embarrassingly, proves 
to be a reefer, in its rather loosely smiling mouth— 
“Through evil and eagles,” blithers the Springer, “the 
climate blondes its way, for they are no strength under 
the coarse war. No not for roguery until the monitors are 
there in blashing sheets of earth to mate and say medo- 
shnicka bleelar medoometnozz in bergamot and playful 
fantasy under the throne and nose of the least merciful 
king....” well, there is a good deal of this sort of thing, 
and a good time to nip out for popcorn, which in the 
Platz turn out to be morning-glory seeds popped into 


little stilled brown explosions. None of the regular com-— 


pany here actually watch the movie under the rug much— 


only visitors passing through: friends of Magda, defectors — 
from the great aspirin factory in Leverkusen, over in the | 


corer there dribbling liberated cornstarch|and water on 
each other’s naked bodies, giggling unhealthily ...dev- 
otees of the I Ching who have a favorite hexagram | 


tattooed on each toe, who can never stay in one place for 
long, can you guess why? Because they always have I 


The Counterforce 871 


Ching feet! also stumblebum magicians. who can’t help 
leaving themselves wide open for disastrous visits from 
Qlippoth, Ouijaboard jokesters, poltergeists, all kinds of _ 
astral-plane tankers and feebs—yeah they're all showing. 
up at Der Platz these days. But the alternative is to start 
keeping some out and not others, and nobody’s ready for 
that.:.. Decisions like that are for some angel stationed 
very high, watching us at our many perversities, crawling 
across black satin, gagging on whip-handles, licking the 
blood from a lover's vein-hit, all of it, every lost giggle 
or sigh, being carried on under a sentence of death whose 
deep beauty the angel has never been close to.... 


WEISSMANN'S TAROT 


Weissmann’s Tarot is better than Slothrop’s. Here are 
the real cards, exactly as they came up. 
Significator: . Knight of Swords 
Covered by: The Tower 
Crossed by: Queen of Swords 
Crowning: King of Cups 
Beneath: Ace of Swords 
Before: 4 of Cups 
Behind: 4 of Pentacles 
Self: Page of Pentacles 
House: 8 of Cups 
Hopes and Fears: 2 of Swords 
What will come: The World 
He appears first with boots and insignia shining as the 
rider on a black horse, charging in a gallop neither he nor 
horse can control, across the heath over the giant grave- 
mounds, scattering the black-faced sheep, while dark 
stands of juniper move dreamily, death-loving, across his 
path in a parallax of unhurrying fatality, presiding as 
monuments do over the green and tan departure of sum- 
mer, the dust-colored lowlands and at last the field-gray 
sea, a prairie of sea darkening to purple where the sun- 
light comes through, in great circles, spotlights on a danc- 
or, 


He is the father you will never quite manage to kill. 
The. Oedipal situation in the Zone these days is terrible. 
There is no dignity. The mothers have been masculinized 


872 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


to old worn moneybags of no sexual interest to anyone, 
and yet here are their sons, still trapped inside inertias of 
lust that are 40 years out of date. The fathers have no 
power today and never did, but because 40 years ago we 
could not kill them, we are condemned now to the same 
passivity, the same masochist fantasies they cherished in 
secret, and worse, we are condemned in our weakness to 
impersonate men of power our own infant children must 
hate, and wish to usurp the place of, and fail.... So 
generation after generation of men in love with pain and 
passivity serve out their time in the Zone, silent, redolent 
of faded sperm, terrified of dying, desperately addicted 
to the comforts others sell them, however useless, ugly or 
shallow, willing to have life defined for them by men 
whose only talent is for death. 

Of 77 cards that could have come up, Weissmann is 
“covered,” that is his present condition is set forth, by 
The Tower. It is a puzzling card, and everybody has a 
different story on it. It shows a bolt of lightning striking a 
tall phallic structure, and two figures, one wearing a 
crown, falling from it. Some read ejaculation, and leave it 
at that. Others see a Gnostic or Cathar symbol for the 
Church of Rome, and this is generalized to mean any 
System which cannot tolerate heresy: a:system which, by 
its nature, must sooner or later fall. We know by now 
that it is also the Rocket. 

Members of the Order of the Golden Dawn believe 
The Tower represents victory over splendor, and avenging 
force. As Goebbels, beyond all his professional verbalizing, 
believed in the Rocket as an avenger. 

On the Kabbalist Tree of Life, the path of The Tower 
connects the sephira Netzach, victory, with Hod, glory or 
splendor. Hence the Golden Dawn interpretation. Netzach 
is fiery and emotional, Hod is watery and logical. On the 
body of God, these two Sephiroth are the thighs, the pillars 
of the Temple, resolving together in Yesod, the sex and 
excretory organs. 

But each of the Sephiroth is also haunted by its proper 
demons or Qlippoth. Netzach by the Ghorab Tzerek, the — 
Ravens of Death, and Hod by the Samael, the Poison of _ 
God. No one has asked the demons at either level, but — 
there may be just the wee vulnerability here to a sensa- _ 


—_— ss = 


The Counterforce 873 


tion of falling, the kind of very steep and out-of-scale fall 
we find in dreams, a falling more through space than 
among objects. Though the different Qlippoth can only. 
work each his own sort of evil, activity on the path of The 
Tower, from Netzach to Hod, seems to’ve resulted in the 
emergence of a new kind of demon (what, a dialectical 
Tarot? Yes indeedyfoax! A-and if you don’t think there are 
Marxist-Leninist magicians around, well you better think 
againl). The Ravens of Death have now tasted of the 
Poison of God... but in doses small enough not to sicken 
but to bring on, like the Amanita muscaria, a very peculiar 
state of mind.... They have no official name, but they 
are the Rocket’s guardian demons. 
' Weissmann is crossed by the Queen of his suit. Perhaps 
himself, in drag. She is the chief obstacle in his way. At his 
‘foundation is the single sword flaming inside the crown: 
again, Netzach, victory. In the American deck this card 
has come down to us as the ace of spades, which is a bit 
‘more sinister: you know the silence that falls on the room 
when it comes up, whatever the game. Behind him, movy- 
ing out of his life as an influence, is the 4 or Four of 
| Pentacles, which shows a figure of modest property 
desperately clutching on to what he owns, four gold 
| coins—this feeb is holding two of them down with his 
feet, balancing another on his head and holding the fourth 
‘tightly against his stomach, which is ulcerous.. It is the 
stationary witch trying to hold her candy house against the 
host of nibblers out there in the dark. Moving in, before 
him, comes a feast of cups, a satiety. Lotta booze and 
broads for Weissmann coming soon. Good for him—al- 
though in his house he is seen walking away, renouncing 
eight stacked gold chalices. Perhaps he is to be given only 
what he must walk away from. Perhaps it is because in the 
lees of the night’s last cup is the bitter presence of a 
woman sitting by a rocky shore, the Two of Swords, alone 
at the Baltic edge, blindfolded in the moonlight, holding 
the two blades crossed upon her breasts... the meaning is 
‘usually taken as “concord in a state of arms,” a good 
enough description of the Zone nowadays, and it describes 
his deepest hopes, or fears.. 

Himself, as the World sees him: the scholarly young 
S98 of Pentacles, meditating on his magic gold talisman, 


874 Gravity’s RaInsow 


The Page may also be used to stand for a young girl. But 
Pentacles describe people of very dark complexion, and so 
the card almost certainly is Enzian as a young man. And 
Weissmann may at last, in this limited pasteboard way, 
have become what he first loved. 

The King of Cups, crowning his hopes, is the fair in- 
tellectual-king. If you’re wondering where he’s gone, look 
among the successful academics, the Presidential advisers, 
the token intellectuals who sit on boards of directors. He 
is almost surely there. Look high, not low. 

His future card, the card of what will come, is The 
World. 


Tue Last GREEN AND MAGENTA 


The Heath grows green and magenta in all directions, 
earth and heather, coming of age— 
No. It was spring. 


THE Horse 


In a field, beyond the clearing and the trees, the last 
horse is standing, tamished silver-gray, hardly more than 
an assembling of shadows. The heathen Germans who lived 
here sacrificed horses once, in their old ceremonies. Later 
the horse’s role changed from holy offering to servant of — 
power. By then a great change was working on the Heath, 
kneading, turning, stirring with fingers strong as wind. 

Now that sacrifice has become a political act, an act of — 
Caesar, the last horse cares only about how the wind starts 4 
up this afternoon: rises at first, and tries to stick, to catch, — 
but fails...each time, the horse feels a similar rising in 
his heart, at the edges of eye, ear, brain.... Finally, at — 
the sure catching of the wind, which is also a turning in 
the day, his head rises, and a shiver comes over him— 
possesses him. His tail lashes at the clear elusive flash of — 
the wind. The sacrifice in the grove is beginning. 

| 


Isaac | 


The Counterforce 875 


passing through the chambers one by one, is terrible and 
complex. You must have not only the schooling in counter- 
signs and seals, not only the physical readiness through 
exercise and abstinence, but also a hardon of resolution 
that will never go limp on you. The angels at the door- 
ways will try to con you, threaten you, play all manner of 
cruel practical jokes, to tum you aside. The Qlippoth, 
shells of the dead, will use all your love for friends who 
have passed across against you. You have chosen the 
active way, and there is no faltering without finding the 
most mortal danger. 

The other way is dark and female, passive, self-aban- 
-doning. Isaac under the blade. The glittering edge widen- 
ing to a hallway, down, up which the soul is borne by an 
irresistible Aether. Gerhardt von Goll on his camera dolly, 
whooping with joy, barrel-assing down the long corridors 
at Nymphenburg. (Let us leave him here, in his transport, 
in his innocence....) The numinous light grows ahead, 
almost blue among all this gilt and glass. The gilders 
worked naked and had their heads shaved bald—to get a 
static charge to hold the fluttering leaf they had first to 
run the brush through their pubic hair: genital electricity 
would shine forever down these gold vistas. But we have 
long left mad Ludwig and his Spanish dancer guttering, 
fading scarlet across the marble, shining so treacherously 
like sweet water... already that lies behind. The ascent 
to the Merkabah, despite his last feeble vestiges of man- 
hood, last gestures toward the possibility of magic, is 
irreversibly on route.... 


Pre-LAuNcH 


A giant white fly: an erect penis buzzing in white lace, 
clotted with blood or sperm. Deathlace is the boy’s bridal 
costume. His smooth feet, bound side by side, are in white 
satin slippers with white bows. His red nipples are erect. 
The golden hairs on his back, alloyed German gold, pale 
yellow to white, run symmetric about his spine, run in 
arches fine and whirled as the arches of a fingerprint, as 
filings along magnetic lines of force. Each freckle or mole 
is a dark, precisely-set anomaly in the field. Sweat gathers 
at his nape. He is gagged with a white kid glove. Weiss- 


“ 


876 Gravity’s RaInsow 


mann has engineered all the symbolism today. The glove 
is the female equivalent of the Hand of Glory, which 
second-story men use to light their way into your home: a 
candle in a dead man’s hand, erect as all your tissue will 
grow at the first delicious tongue-flick of your mistress 
Death. The glove is the cavity into which the Hand fits, 
as the 00000 is the womb into which Gottfried returns. 

Stuff him in. Not a Procrustean bed, but modified to 
take him. The two, boy and Rocket, concurrently designed. 
Its steel hindquarters bent so beautifully... he fits well. 
They are mated to each other, Schwarzgerit and next 
higher assembly, His bare limbs in their metal bondage 
writhe among the fuel, oxidizer, live-steam lines, thrust 
frame, compressed air battery, exhaust elbow, decomposer, 
tanks, vents, valves... and one of these valves, one test- 
point, one pressure-switch is the right one, the true 
clitoris, routed directly into the nervous system of 
the oooo0, She should not be a mystery to you, 
Gottfried, Find the zone of love, lick and kiss... 
you have time—there are still a few minutes. The © 
liquid oxygen runs freezing so close to your cheek, bones 
of frost to burn you past feeling. Soon there will be the 
fires, too. The Oven we fattened you for will glow. Here — 
is the sergeant, bringing the Ziindkreuz. The pyrotechnic - 
Cross to light you off. The men are at attention. Get ready, _ 
Liebchen. 


a 


&, 
] 


HARDWARE et 


He’s been given a window of artificial sapphire, four — 
inches across, grown by the IG in 1942 as a mushroom- _ 
shaped boule, a touch of cobalt added to give it a green- 
ish tint—very heat-resistant, transparent to most visible _ 
frequencies—it warps the images of sky and clouds out- - 
side, but pleasantly, like Ochsen-Augen in Grandmother's — 
day, the days before window-glass.... | : 

Part of the vaporized oxygen is routed through Gott- 
fried’s Imipolex shroud. In one of his ears, a) tiny speaker 
has been surgically implanted. It shines like la pretty ear-_ 
ring. The data link runs through the radio-guidance sys- 
tem, and the words of Weissmann are to be, for a while, — 
multiplexed with the error-corrections sent out to the 


The Counterforce 877 


Rocket. But there’s no return channel from Gottfried to the 
ground. The’ exact moment of his death will never be 
known. 


CHAsE Music 


At long last, after a distinguished career of uttering, 
“My God, we are too late!” always with the trace of a 
sneer, a pro-forma condescension—because of course he 
never arrives too late, there’s always a reprieve, a mistake 
by one of the Yellow Adversary’s hired bunglers, at worst 
a vital clue to be found next to the body—now, finally, Sir 
Denis Nayland Smith will arrive, my God, too late. 

Superman will swoop boots-first into a deserted clear- 
ing, a launcher-erector sighing oil through a slow seal-leak, 
gum evoked from the trees, bitter manna for this bitterest 
of passages. The colors of his cape will wilt in the after- 
noon sun, curls on his head begin to show their first threads 
of gray. Philip Marlowe will suffer a horrible migraine and 
reach by reflex for the pint of rye in his suit pocket, and 
feel homesick for the lacework balconies of the Bradbury 
Building. 

- Submariner and his multilingual gang will run into bat- 
tery trouble. Plasticman will lose his way among the 
Imipolex chains, and topologists all over the Zone will run 
out and stop payments on his honorarium checks (“per- 
fectly deformable,” indeed!) The Lone Ranger will storm 
in at the head of a posse, rowels tearing blood from the 
stallion’s white hide, to find his young friend, innocent 
Dan, swinging from a tree limb by a broken neck. (Tonto, 
God willing, will put on the ghost shirt and find some cold 
fire to hunker down by to sharpen his knife.) 

“Too late” was never in their programming. They find 
instead a moment’s suspending of their sanity—but then 
it’s over with, whew, and it’s back to the trail, back to the 
Daily Planet. Yes Jimmy, it must’ve been the day I ran 
into that singularity, those few seconds of absolute mystery 
... you know Jimmy, time—time is a funny thing.... 
There'll be a thousand ways to forget. The heroes will go 
on, kicked upstairs to oversee the development of bright 
new middle-line personnel, and they will watch their Sys- 
tem falling apart, watch those singularities begin to come 


\ 


ad 


878 Gravity’s Rarnsow 


more and more often, proclaiming another dispensation 
out of the tissue of old-fashioned time, and they'll call it 
cancer, and just won’t know what things are coming to, or 
what’s the meaning of it all, Jimmy. ... 

These days, he finds he actually misses the dogs. Who 
would have thought he’d ever feel sentimental over a pack 
of slobbering curs? But here in the Sub-ministry all is so 
odorless, touchless. The sensory deprivation, for a while, 
did stimulate his curiosity. For a while he kept a faithful 
daily record of his physiological changes. But this was 
mostly remembering about Pavlov on his own deathbed, 
recording himself till the end. With Pointsman it’s only 
habit, retro-scientism: a last look back at the door to 
Stockholm, closing behind him forever. The entries began 
to fall off, and presently stopped. He signed reports, he 
supervised, He traveled to other parts of England, later to 
other countries, to scout for fresh talent. In the faces of 
Mossmoon and the others, at odd moments, he could detect 
a reflex he’d never allowed himself to dream of: the toler- 
ance of men in power for one who never Made His Move, — 
or made it wrong. Of course there are still moments of © 
creative challenge— We 4 

Yes, well, he’s an ex-scientist now, one who'll never get — 
Into It far enough to start talking about God, apple- : 

d 


cheeked lovable white-haired eccentric gabbing from the 
vantage of his Laureate—no he'll be left only with Cause j 
and Effect, and the rest of his sterile armamentarium... 
his mineral corridors do not shine. They will stay the same 
neutral nameless tone from here in to the central chamber, — 
and the perfectly rehearsed scene he is to play there, 
after all.... te : 
CountTDOWN 


The countdown as we know it, 10-9-8-u.s.w., was in- 
vented by Fritz Lang in 1929 for the Ufa film Die Frau in — 
Mond. He put it into the launch scene to heighten 
suspense. “It is another of my damned ‘touches, ” F; 
Lang said. ie Beth : 

“At the Creation,” explains Kabbalist spokesman Steve 
Edelman, “God sent out a pulse of energy into the void. 
It presently branched and sorted into ten distinct spheres 


‘ 


The Counterforce 879 


or aspects, corresponding to the numbers 1-10. These are 
known as the Sephiroth. To return to God, the soul must 
negotiate each of the Sephiroth, from ten back to one. 
Armed with magic and faith, Kabbalists have set out to’ 
conquer the Sephiroth. Many Kabbalist secrets have to do 
with making the trip successfully. 

“Now the Sephiroth fall into a pattern, which is called 
the Tree of Life. It is also the body of God. Drawn among 
the ten spheres are 22 paths. Each path corresponds to a 
letter of the Hebrew alphabet, and also to one of the 
cards called “Major Arcana’ in the Tarot. So although the 
Rocket countdown appears to be serial, it actually conceals 
the Tree of Life, which must be apprehended all at once, 
together, in parallel. 

_ “Some Sephiroth are active or masculine, others passive 
or feminine. But the Tree itself is a unity, rooted exactly 
at the Bodenplatte. It is the axis of a particular Earth, a 
new dispensation, brought into being by the Great Firing.” 

“But but with a new axis, a newly spinning Earth,” it 
occurs to the visitor, “what happens to astrology?” 

“The signs change, idiot,” snaps Edelman, reaching for 
his family-size jar of Thorazine. He has become such a 
habitual user of this tranquilizing drug that his complexion 
has deepened to an alarming slate-purple. It makes him an 
oddity on the street here, where everybody else walks 
around suntanned, and red-eyed from one irritant or 
another. Edelman’s children, mischievous little devils, 
have lately taken to slipping wafer capacitors from junked 
transistor radios into Pop’s Thorazine jar. To his inattentive 
eye there was hardly any difference: so, for a while, Edel- 
man thought he must be developing a tolerance, and that 
the Abyss had crept intolerably close, only an accident 
away—a siren in the street, a jet plane rumbling in a hold- 
ing pattern—but luckily his wife discovered the prank in 
time, and now, before he swallows, he is careful to scruti- 
nize each Thorazine for leads, mu’s, numbering. 

“Here—” hefting a fat Xeroxed sheaf, “the Ephemeris. 
Based on the new rotation.” 

“You mean someone’s actually found the Bodenplatte? 
The Pole?” 

“The delta-t itself. It wasn’t made public, naturally. The 
‘Kaisersbart Expedition’ found it.” 


‘\ é 


880 Gravity’s RAINBOW 


A pseudonym, evidently. Everyone knows the Kaiser 
has no beard. , 


StrruNG INTO THE APOLLONIAN DREAM... - 


When something real is about to happen to you, you go 
toward it with a transparent surface parallel to your own 
front that hums and bisects both your ears, making eyes 
very alert. The light bends toward chalky blue. Your skin 
aches, At last: something real. 

Here in the tail section of the ooooo, Gottfried has 
found this clear surface before him in fact, literal: the’ 
Imipolex shroud. Flotsam from his childhood are rising 
through his attention. He’s remembering the skin of an 
apple, bursting with nebulae, a look into curved reddening 
space. His eyes taken on and on, and further.... The © 
plastic surface flutters minutely: gray-white, mocking, an — 
enemy of color. F 

The day outside is raw and the victim lightly dressed, — 
but he feels warm in here. His white stockings stretch 
nicely from his suspender-tabs, He has found a shallow 
bend in a pipe where he can rest his cheek as he gazes 
into the shroud. He feels his hair tickling his back, his i 
bared shoulders, It’s a dim, whited room. A room for lying — 
in, bridal and open to the pallid spaces of the evening, — 
waiting for whatever will fallon him. 

Phone traffic drones into his wired ear, The voices are 
metal and drastically filtered. They buzz like the voices of : 
surgeons, heard as you're going under ether. Though they i 
now only speak the ritual words, he can still tell them 
apart. : oa 

The soft smell of Imipolex, wrapping him absolutely, is 
a smell he knows. It doesn’t frighten him, It was in the 
room when he fell asleep so long ago, so deep in sweet — 
paralyzed childhood . . . it was there as he began to dream. 
Now it is time to wake, into the breath of what was al- 
ways real. Come, wake. All is well. Me 


OrrHEus Puts Down ack 


LOS ANGELES (PNS)—Richard M, Zhlubb, night manages : 
of the Orpheus Theatre on Melrose, has come out against 


gy: 


_ The Counterforce 881 


' what he calls “irresponsible use of the harmonica.” Or, 
actually, “harbodica,” since Manager Zhlubb suffers from 
_.a chronic adenoidal condition, which affects his speech. 
_ Friends and detractors alike think of him as “the Adenoid.” 
' Anyway, Zhlubb states that his queues, especially for mid- 
_ night showings, have fallen into a state of near anarchy 
_ because of the musical instrument. 
_ _ “Its been going on ever since our Bengt Ekerot / Maria 
_ Casarés Film Festival,” complains Zhlubb, who is fiftyish 
_/and jowled, with a permanent five-o’clock shadow (the 
- worst by far of all the Hourly Shadows), and a habit of 

- throwing his arms up into an inverted “peace sign,” which 
_ also happens to be semaphore code for the letter U, ex- 
posing in the act uncounted yards of white French cuff. 

_ “Here, Richard,” jeers a passerby, “I got your French 

cuff, right here,” meanwhile exposing himself in the 

_ grossest possible way and manipulating his foreskin in a 
-manner your correspondent cannot set upon his page. 

Manager Zhlubb winces slightly. “That’s one of the 

_ ringleaders, definitely,” he confides. “I’ve had a lot of 

trouble, with him. Him and that Steve Edelman.” He pro- 

- nounces it “Edelbid:” “I’b dot afraid to dabe dabes.” 

__ The case he refers to is still pending. Steve Edelman, a 
_ Hollywood. businessman, accused last year of an 11569 
_ (Attempted Mopery with a Subversive Instrument), is 
currently in Atascadero under indefinite observation. It is 
_ alleged that Edelman, in an unauthorized state of mind, 
_ attempted to play a chord progression on the Department 
_ of Justice list, out in the street and in the presence of a 
whole movie-queue of witnesses. 

_ “A-and now they're all doing it. Well, not ‘all,’ let me 
just clarify that, of course the actual lawbreakers are only 

_ a small but loud minority, what I meant to say was, all 
those like Edelman. Certainly not all those good folks in 
the queue. A-ha-ha. Here, let me show you something.” 
He ushers you into the black Managerial Volkswagen, 

_and before you know it, you're on the freeways, Near the 
interchange of the San Diego and the Santa Monica, 
_ Zhlubb points to a stretch of pavement: “Here’s where I 
_ got my first glimpse of one. Driving a VW, just like mine. 
_ Imagine. I couldn’t believe my eyes.” But it is difficult to 
_ keep one’s whole attention centered on Manager Zhlubb. 


4 


882 Gravity’s RAInsow 


The Santa Monica Freeway is traditionally the scene of 
every form of automotive folly known to man. It is not 
white and well-bred like the San Diego, nor as treacher- 
ously engineered as the Pasadena, nor quite as ghetto- 
suicidal as the Harbor. No, one hesitates to say it, but the 
Santa Monica is a freeway for freaks, and they are all out 
today, making it difficult for you to follow the Manager’s 
entertaining story. You cannot repress a certain shudder 
of distaste, almost a reflexive Consciousness of Kind, 
in their presence. They come gibbering in at you from 
all sides, swarming in, rolling their eyes through the 
side windows, playing harmonicas and even kazoos, in full — 
disrespect for the Prohibitions, 

“Relax,” the Manager’s eyes characteristically aglitter, — 
“There'll be a nice secure home for them all, down in 
Orange County. Right next to Disneyland,” pausing then 
exactly like a nightclub comic, alone in his tar circle, his 
chalk terror, 

Laughter surrounds you. Full, faithful-audience laughter, — 
coming from the four points of the padded interior. You 
realize, with a vague sense of dismay, that this is some 
kind of a stereo rig here, and a glance inside the glove 
compartment reveals an entire library of similar tapes: 
CHEERING (AFFECTIONATE), CHEERING (AROUSED), HOSTILE 
MOB in an assortment of 22 languages, YESES, NOES, NEGRO 
SUPPORTERS, WOMEN SUPPORTERS, ATHLETIC—oh, come 
NOW—FIRE-FIGHT (CONVENTIONAL), ‘FIRE-FIGHT (NU-— 
CLEAR), FIRE-FIGHT (URBAN), CATHEDRAL ACOUSTICS..... 

“We have to talk in some kind of code, naturally,” con- 
tinues the Manager. “We always have. But none of the © 
codes is that hard to break. Opponents have accused us, 
for just that reason, of contempt for the people. But really 
we do it all in the spirit of fair play. We're not monsters. 
We know we have to give them some chance. We can’t 
take hope away from them, can we?” : 4 ay 

The Volkswagen is now over downtown L.A., where 
the stream of traffic edges aside for a convoy of dark 
Lincolns, some Fords, even GMCs, but not a Pontiac in 
the lot. Stuck on each windshield and rear! window is a 
fluorescent orange strip that reads FUNERAL. Me) 

The Manager's sniffling now. “He was one of the best. 
I couldn’t go myself, but I did send a high-level assisant. 

-Who'll ever replace him, I wonder,” punching a sly button 


om 


Al 


The Counterforce 883 


under the dash. The laughter this time is sparse male oh- 

hoho’s with an edge of cigar smoke and aged bourbon, 
Sparse but loud. Phrases like “Dick, you character!” and 
_ “Listen to him,” can also be made out. 

_ “I have a fantasy about how I'll die. I suppose you're 
on their payroll, but that’s all right. Listen to this. It’s 
3 a.m., on the Santa Monica Freeway, a warm night. All 
my windows are open. I’m doing about 70, 75. The wind 
_ blows in, and from the floor in back lifts a thin plastic 

bag, a common dry-cleaning bag: it comes floating in the 

air, moving from behind, the mercury lights turning it 
white as a ghost... it wraps around my head, so super- 
fine and transparent I don’t know it’s there really until 
too late. A plastic shroud, smothering me to my death. . . .” 

Heading up the Hollywood Freeway, between a mys- 
teriously-canvased trailer rig and a liquid-hydrogen tanker 

sleek as a torpedo, we come upon a veritable caravan of 

harmonica players. “At least it’s not those tambourines,” 
Zhlubb mutters, “There aren’t as many tambourines as last 
year, thank God.” 

Quilted-steel catering trucks crisscross in the afternoon. 
Their ripples shine like a lake of potable water after hard 
desert passage. It’s a Collection Day, and the garbage 
trucks are all heading north toward the Ventura Freeway, 
a catharsis of dumpsters, all hues, shapes and batterings. 
Returning to the Center, with all the gathered fragments 
of the Vessels.... 

The sound of a siren takes you both unaware. Zhlubb 
se up sharply into his mirror. “You're not holding, are 
you 

But the sound is greater than police, It wraps the con- 
crete and the smog, it fills the basin and mountains further 
than any mortal could ever move...could move in 
time,... 

“I don’t think that’s a police siren.” Your guts in a 
K you reach for the knob of the AM radio. “I don’t 
t p ates 


\ Tue CLEARING 


_ “Raumen,” cries Captain Blicero, Peroxide and perman- 

ganate tanks have been serviced. The gyros are mun up. 

Observers crouch down in the slit trenches. Tools and 
\ 


nts 
as 
i. -2eae 


884 Gravity's RaInBsow 


fittings are stashed rattling in the back of an idling lorry. 
The battery-loading crew and the sergeant who screwed 
in the percussion pin climb in after, and the truck hauls 
away down the fresh brown ruts of earth, into the 
trees. Blicero remains for a few seconds at launch posi- 
tion, looking around to see that all is in order. Then ~ 
he turns away and walks, with deliberate speed, to the 
fire-control car. 

“Steuerung klar?” he asks the boy at the steering panel. 

“Ist klar.” In the lights from the panel, Max’s face is 
hard, stubborn gold. 

“Treibwerk klar?” 

“Ist klar,” from Moritz at the robe motor panel. Into 
the phone dangling at his neck, he tells the Ope 
Room, “Luftlage klar.” 

“Schliissel auf SCHIESSEN,” orders Blicero. 

Moritz turns the main key to FIRE. “Schliissel steht auf 
SCHIESSEN,” 

Klar; | 

There ought to be big dramatic pauses here. Weiss- 
mann’s head ought to be teeming with last images of 
creamy buttocks knotted together in fear (not one trickle — 
of shit, Liebchen?) the last curtain of gold lashes over — 
young eyes pleading, gagged throat trying to say too late — 
what he should have said in the tent last night... deep in — 
the throat, the gullet, where Blicero’s own cock’s head has — 
burst for the last time (but what’s this just past the — 
spasming cervix, past the Curve Into The Darkness The ~ 
Stink The...The White...The Corner. . Waiting. my 4 
Waiting For—). But no, the ritual has its velvet grip on 
them all. So strong, so warm. 

“Durchschalten.” Blicero’s voice is alee and steady. 

“Luftlage klar,” Max calls from the steering panel. 

Moritz presses the button marked vorstuFE. “Ist durch- — 
geschaltet.” oe 

A pause of 15 seconds while thé? ‘omega tank comes up 
to pressure. A light blazes up on Moritz’s ent XY . 

Entliftung. “Beluftung klar.” 

The ignition lamp lights: Zundung. a aes Klar, “a= 

Then, “Vorstufe klar.” Vorstufe is the last position from 
which Moritz can still switch backward. The flame grows 
at the base of the Rocket. Colors develop. There is a period 
of four seconds here, four seconds of indeterminacy. T 


oe The Counterforce 885 


rial even has a place for that. The difference between a 
top-grade launch officer and one doomed to mediocrity is 
in knowing exactly when, inside this chiming and fable- 
crowded passage, to order Hauptstufe. 

Blicero is a master. He learned quite early to fall into 


. a trance, to wait for the illumination, which always comes. 
It is nothing he’s ever spoken of aloud. 


“Hauptstufe.” 
“Hauptstufe ist gegeben.” 
. The panel is latched forever. 
- Two lights wink out. “Stecker 1 und 2 gefallen,” Moritz 
 $OBORE: The Stotz plugs lie blasted on the ground, tossing 
in the splash of flame. On gravity feed, the flame is bright 


_ yellow. Then the turbine begins to roar. The flame sud- 


denly turns blue. The sound of it grows to full cry. The 
_ Rocket stays a moment longer on the steel table, then 
_ slowly, trembling, furiously muscular, it begins to rise. 
Four seconds later it begins to pitch over. But the flame is 


_ too bright for anyone to see Gottfried inside, except now 
_ as an erotic category, hallucinated out of that blue vio- 


lence, for purposes of self-arousal. 


ASCENT 


This ascent will be betrayed to Gravity. But the Rocket 
engine, the deep cry of combustion that jars the soul, 
_ promises escape. The victim, in bondage to falling, rises 
on a promise, a prophecy, of Escape. . 

Moving now toward the kind of light where at last the 
apple is apple-colored. The knife cuts through the apple 
_ like a knife cutting an apple. Everything is where it is, no 


clearer than usual, but certainly more present. So much 


has to be left behind now, so quickly. Pressed down-and- 
aft im his elastic bonds, pressed painfully (his pectorals 
ache, an inner thigh has frozen numb) till his forehead is 
bent to touch one knee, where his hair rubs in a touch 
erying or submissive as a balcony empty in the rain, 
Gottfried does not wish to cry out... he knows they can’t 


a hear him, but still he prefers not tors ito ‘radio, back ta 
_ them... it was done as a favor, Blicero wanted to make it 


1si€ for me, he knew I'd try to hold on—hold each voice, 


os each + hum or crackle— 


*—p ao ee” 


886 Gravity's Ramnsow . 


last thin pages fluttering closed, a line gently, passively 
unfinished, a pastel hesitancy: Blicero’s hair is darker, 
shoulder-length and permanently waved, he is an adoles- 
cent squire or page looking into an optical device and 
beckoning the child Gottfried with a motherly or eager-to- 
educate look... now he is far away, seated, at the end of 
an olive room, past shapes going out of focus, shapes 
Gottfried can’t identify as friend or enemy, between him 
and—where did he—it’s already gone, no... they're be- _ 
ginning to slide away now faster than he can ‘hold, it’s like 
falling to sleep—they begin to blur CATCH you can hold 

it steady enough to see a suspender-belt straining down ~ 
your thighs, white straps as slender as the legs of a fawn ~ 
and the points of the black... the black CATCH you've © 
let a number of them go by, Gottfried, important ones you 
didn’t want to miss... you know this is the last time... 
CATCH when did the roaring stop? Brennschluss, when — 
was Brennschluss it can’t be this soon... but the burnt-out 
tail-opening is swinging across the sun and through the © 
blonde hair of the victim here’s a Brocken-specter, some- 
one’s, something’s shadow projected from out here in the 
bright sun and darkening sky into the regions of gold, of 
whitening, of growing still as underwater as Gravity dips 
away briefly . .. what is this death but a whitening, a carry- 
ing of whiteness to ultrawhite, what is it but bleaches, 
detergents, oxidizers, abrasives— Streckefuss he’s been 
today to the boy’s tormented muscles, but more appro- 
priately is he Blicker, Bleicheréde, Bleacher, Blicero, ex- — 
tending, rarefying the Caucasian pallor to an abolition of 
pigment, of melanin, of spectrum, of separateness from 
shade to shade, it is so white that CATCH the dog was a — 
red setter, the last dog’s head, the kind dog come to see — 
him off can’t remember what red meant, the pigeon he ~ 
chased was slateblue, but they’re both white now beside 
the canal that night the smell of trees oh I didn’t want to — 
lose that night CATCH a wave between uses, across a 
street, both houses are ships, one’s going off on a long, an 
important journey, and the waving is full of ease and 
affection CATCH last word from Blicero: |“The edge of 
evening... the long curve of people all wishing on fet 
first Stes . Always remember those men aand vomen — 


j 


The Counterforce 887 


_ point of light in the sky. The single point, and the Shadow 
| that has just gathered you in its sweep...” 
Always remember. 
The first star hangs between his feet. 
Now— - 


DESCENT 


: 
. 

The rhythmic clapping resonates inside these walls, 
| which are hard and glossy as coal: Come-on! Start-the- 
| show! Come-on! Start-the-show! The screen is a dim page 
_ spread before us, white and silent. The film has broken, or 
| a projector bulb has burned out. It was difficult even for 
us, old fans who've always been at the movies (haven’t 
we?) to tell which before the darkness swept in. The last 
{ image was too immediate for any eye to register, It may 
| haye been a human figure, dreaming of an early evening 
in each great capital luminous enough to tell him he will 
| never die, coming outside to wish on the first star. But it 
| was not a star, it was falling, a bright angel of death, And 
I in the darkening and awful expanse of screen serngunins 


—— 


has kept on, a film we have not learned to see... it is 
now a ‘closeup of the face, a face we all know— 

_ And it is just here, just at this dark and silent fhe: 
that the pointed tip of the Rocket, falling nearly a mile, 
per second, absolutely and forever without sound, reaches 
its last unmeasurable gap above the roof of ‘this old 

, theatre, the last delta-t. 

| | There is time, if you need the comfort, to touch the 

person next to you, or to reach between your own cold 

\ legs...or, if song must find you, here’s one They never 

| taught anyone to sing, a hymn by William Slothrop, cen- 

turies forgotten and out of print, sung to a simple and 

Bestent air of the period. Follow the bouncing ball: 


There is a Hand to turn the time, 

Though thy Glass today be run, _ 

Till the Light that hath hoagie the Towers low 
Find the last poor Pret'rite one. 

Till the Riders sleep by ev'ry road, 

All through our crippI’d Zone, 

ie With a face on ev'ry Ss onegpaga 

ii And a Soul in ev'ry stone. . 


i: I low everybody— 


Cy 
Boga 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Tuomas Pyncuon is known almost exclusively through — 
his writing. In all other respects, he craves and guards — 
his privacy. The public facts about his life are therefore — 
few and far between. He was bor in 1937 and attended — 
Cornell University, where he published his first story, 
“Mortality and Mercy in Vienna,” in EPocH. Soon after 
leaving Cornell, he published three short stories— 

“Under the Rose,” in NOBLE SAVAGE #3; “Entropy,” in 
THE KENYON REVIEW; dnd “Low-Lands,” in NEW WORLD 
writinc #16—which earned him an immediate repleee 
tion among the narrow but intense circle of short story 
readers. His novel V. won the coveted William Faulkner — 
Foundation First Novel Award in 1963. His second nove 
The Crying of Lot 49, appeared in 1966. Since then he 
has published “The Secret Investigation” in THE SATUR-- 
DAY EVENING POST, and an essay on Los Angeles in 

NEW YORK TIMES MAGAZINE. GRAVITY’S RAINBOW, — 
his third and most recent novel, was published in 1973. 
Mr. Pynchon is currently rumored to spend his time 
primarily in California and Mexico. a 


THE NAMES THAT SPELL 
~ GREAT LITERATURE 


n00se from today’s most renowned world authors—every one 
1 important addition to your personal library. 


rmann Hesse 
O STEPPENWOLF-~ 4789 © $1.25 
© DEMIAN 5544 e@ $1.25 
O MAGISTER LUDI ; 5555 @ $1.50 
( BENEATH THE WHEEL 5859 © $1.25 
O NARCISSUS AND GOLDMUND 5868 © $1.50 
( SIDDHARTHA 6909 © $1.25 
(1 THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST 7362 © $1.50 
© ROSSHALDE 7370 © $1.50 
exander Solzhenitsyn 
O ONE DAY IN THE LIFE OF IVAN DENISOVICH 4639 © $ 95 
OTHE LOVE-GIRL AND THE INNOCENT 6600 © $ 95 
OTHE FIRST CIRCLE 7074 © $1.50 
STORIES AND PROSE POEMS 7409 © $1.50 
0 CANCER WARD 7843 @ $1.50 
rzy Kosinskl 
o STEPS 4719 © $ 95 
O BEING THERE 7275 @ $1.25 
O THE PAINTED BIRD 7443 ¢ $1.25 
O THE DEVIL TREE 7865 @ $1.50 
rge Luls Borges 
ia THE ALEPH AND OTHER STORIES, 1939-1969 7117: e@ =$1.95 
O DOCTOR BRODIE’S REPORT 7765 ® $1.95 
dré Schwarz-Bart 
O THE LAST OF THE JUST 7708 © $1.50 
0 A WOMAN NAMED SOLITUDE 7880 © $1.75 
| 
1y them at your local bookstore or use this handy coupon for ordering: 
"satan Bots, ne Bop oe, sia Eat Gv tua be Pano, eons 1 
Please send me the books | have checked above. | am enclosing $______ 
| (Please add 25¢ to cover postage and handling). Send check or money order 
"fo cash or C.0.D.’s please, 


i 


DG—1/74 


* Please allow three weeks for delivery. This offer expires 1/75. - 
a i ee ee es ce es Ses es a ces ee ene es es es a een es 


A St A NY Ne Ge MY He 


RELAX! 
SIT DOWN ’ 
and Catch Up On Your Rondingl . 


THE HARRAD EXPERIMENT by Robert Rimmer 
THE FRENCH CONNECTION by Robin Moore 6369 9 95 ) 


HER by Anonymous (6669—$1. 50) 
THE BELL JAR by Sylvia Plat (7178—$1.5 
THE EXORCIST by William Peter Blatty 


WHEELS by Arthur Hailey (7244—$1.75 


RAGA SIX by Frank Lauria (7249—$1.25 
HIM by Anonymous (7369—$1.50 


THE DAY OF THE JACKAL by Frederick Forsyth (7377—$1. 75 
THE FRIENDS OF EDDIE COYLE by George Higgins (7504—$1 it 
THE TERMINAL MAN by Michael Crichton (7545—$1.75) 


Oe O36 0 G-@so O63 


MEMOIRS OF AN EX-PROM QUEEN by Alix Shulman (7565—$1.75 
THE LEVANTER by Eric Ambler (7603—$1.50 
SHEILA LEVINE IS DEAD AND LIVING IN NEW YORK 

by Gail Parent (7633—$1.50 
THE ODESSA FILE by Frederick Forsyth (7744—$1.75 


Buy them at your local bookstore or use this handy coupon for orde ing 
Bantam Books, Inc., Dept. FBB, 414 East Golf Road, Des Plaines, Ill. 60016 


Please send me the books | have checked above. | am enclosing $______ 
(please add 25¢ to cover postage and handling). Send check or mons 
order—no cash or C.0.D.’s please. 


Tal cal ai 


_|“TREMENDOUS”—NEWSWEEK 


THOMAS PYNCHO ON 


AMERICA’S MOST ACCLAIMED 
NOVELIST IN THE 70'S. 


GRAVITY’S RAINBOW 


HIS MOST HIGHLY PRAISED NOVEL. 
“FANTASTIC” —THE NEW YORK TIMES 
“WILD” —WASHINGTON POST BOOK woRLo| 
“DAZZLING” —ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATGCH 
“BRILLIANT” —ATLANTIC MONTHLY 


“MAGNIFICENT”—SATURDAY REVIEW 
HELLER. BARTH. VONNEGUT. , AND i} 


THOMAS PY 


CATCH 22. THE SOTWEED FAC Le 
SLAUGHTERHOUSE-FIVE. AND =e) 


GRAVITY’S RAINB 

