LESSON 5
Peter's Faith Tested

"The steps of faith fall on the seeming void, but find the rock beneath."

"All I have seen teaches me to trust the Creator for all I have not seen."

Genuine Faith.

When Jesus called Simon "Peter" or "The Rock," he undoubtedly expressed in that name one characteristic which He desired to see in the faith of His disciples, and particularly in each of His Apostles. He desired them to possess a faith that was unwavering,—a faith that would make them steadfast in the truth regardless of miracles or the acts of men—a faith that would trust the Lord at all times and under all circumstances, let those times and circumstances be what they may. Jesus knew that the Jews were easily influenced; that a miracle performed today might awaken a feeling in them that He was the King for whom they had been waiting, and that a truth taught tomorrow might arouse in them a feeling that He was an impostor. He wanted to lead them to God and to His Gospel. He longed to have them comprehend the truths of life so they would live them after He was gone from their midst.

Jesus Grieved.

Imagine, then, how grieved He must have been when, after the miracle mentioned in the last chapter, the people arose and hailed Him King and thought by offering Him the bauble of an empty crown, they were doing Him honor! He did not want them to honor Him. His desire was for them to see the power of God, and believe in His divine truth.

Desiring to be alone once more with His Father, not wanting the company even of the three chief apostles, Peter, James, and John, Jesus dismissed the multitude, told the Twelve to get into the ship and sail back to Capernaum, and He retired to a solitary place to pray.

A TEMPESTUOUS SEA
A Storm.

During the night, while Jesus was yet praying, a great storm arose, which stirred the lake into a seething mass of billows. From the mountain Jesus could see His disciples battling with the sea, but unable to make much headway, although they could not see Him.

When the ship was about thirty furlongs (four miles) from the shore, Jesus decided to go into it. It was now past midnight, and the disciples were still struggling in the midst of the heaving sea.

Jesus on the Water.

Imagine their fear when through the darkness they saw an object coming towards them on the waves! And when someone cried out, "It's a Spirit!" they were more frightened than ever.

"But straightway Jesus spoke unto them, saying. Be of good cheer; It is I; be not afraid."

At once, Peter spoke out, saying, "Lord, if it be Thou, bid me come unto Thee on the water."[1]

Peter's Faith.

"Come," said Jesus.

"And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Jesus."

Peter, firm in belief and strong in determination, when your eye sees only the majesty of faith and the perfect manifestation of its power! Mighty and fearless when your eye sees only the glory of God, and your soul cries out to go to Him!

His Doubt.

But when you see "the wind boisterous," you are afraid; and beginning to sink, cry, saying, "Lord, save me."

So it is in life: when the winds of temptation and the waves of despair beat upon us, the eye of faith is turned more upon these raging elements than upon the Light of Life, the power of faith is thus weakened, and as Peter, we begin to sink. Too many, ah, too many go down beneath the billows; only a few cry out as he. "Lord, save us!"

And immediately Jesus stretched forth His hand, and caught him, and said unto him, "O, thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?"

ANOTHER TEST
In Capernaum.

Next morning, the people in Capernaum who knew that Peter and the other disciples had left the opposite shore without Jesus, were very much astonished to see Him in their midst, and said, Rabbi, when camest thou hither?

"Ye seek me," answered Jesus, "not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled."

Lord, save me.

"Lord, save me."

"Labor not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you."[2]

Sermon on the Bread of Life.

He then delivered the famous sermon on the Bread of Life, part of which, as John remembered it, is recorded in John the sixth chapter. There were so many things spoken which the Jews could not understand, because of their prejudice, that they first became confused, then angry, and finally much offended. Those who had only a little faith, became influenced by the murmuring crowd, and said, "We don't believe this man is the Son of God." Even some of His disciples turned away from the Truth, and "walked no more with Him."

Men Swerved by Doubt.

The mass of angry men and women became much like the heaving sea that tossed the disciples the evening before. The winds of ridicule and the waves of discontent beat against the wavering disciples. As they looked upon these angry elements of human passion, their faith in Christ weakened, and they "began to sink."

Jesus Appeals to the Twelve.

In vain, Jesus testified, "It is I, the Son of man!" They would not listen to Him, for He was to them only the son of Joseph the carpenter. As group after group turned their backs upon Him. He turned to the Twelve and said, "Will ye also go away?"

Peter's Answer.

Again it was Peter who broke the silence. With the others, he had looked at the noisy crowd, with the others he had listened to the angry words hurled at their Master. In the midst of this sea of human passion, shall he say, "Lord, if it be Thee, bid me come unto Thee?"

As if he wavered just a little, as if his faith had not yet become as firm as Jesus would have it become, he answered, "Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life."

Belief Matures into Knowledge.

Then, as his assurance became stronger and his thoughts turned from the apostate crowd, he added, "And we believe—and are sure that thou are the Christ, the Son of the living God." Though there came not from Jesus' lips at this time, the word "Blessed," yet, undoubtedly, He was gratified indeed to see the wavering faith of His disciples become steadfast in the heart of His Apostles, as if they would say,

  "Then come the wild weather, come sleet or come snow,
  We will stand by each other, however it blow.
  Oppression and sickness, and sorrow, and pain
  Shall be to our true love as links in a chain."

Footnotes:
1. Matt. 14:28.

2. John 6:25-27.


LESSON 6
Peter's Testimony

At Tyre and Sidon.

Very soon after the people of Capernaum rejected the Savior, as narrated in the previous chapter, Jesus took His Twelve disciples westward across Galilee into the land of Tyre and Sidon, near the Mediterranean Sea. He desired to be alone with the Twelve that He might teach them many things pertaining to the kingdom of God, and thus prepare them for carrying on the work, after He should leave them.

There were many things happened on this tour which must have made it a memorable one to Peter and the other members of the Twelve. First, there was the Gentile woman who sought Jesus, and implored Him to come and heal her little daughter.

A Syro-Phoenician Woman.

Because she did not belong to the Jewish race, the disciples said: "Master, send this woman away, for she is a trouble to us, crying out after us." Of course, they thought then, and a long time afterwards, that the Gospel was only for the Jews. But Jesus taught them that He loved the Gentile woman just as well as He did the Jews. But Peter did not fully understand.

Other Miracles.

From the coast of Tyre and Sidon, they traveled around Galilee and came to the east side of the Sea of Galilee. Here the disciples witnessed further manifestations of the power of Jesus. A deaf man who could not speak plainly was made to hear and to speak; and when the people heard about it, they followed Jesus and the Twelve out of the village into "a desert place."

Again Peter saw a multitude of people fed; this time from only seven loaves and a few small fishes.

It would seem that after all these months with the Savior—hearing His parables, seeing His miracles, feeling His spirit and receiving His teachings daily, the apostles would surely understand the mission of the Redeemer.

Jesus' Sayings Not Understood.

But we read that after these "four thousand men besides women and children" were fed, the disciples entered with Jesus into a boat and rowed across to the west side of the lake. Here they met some Pharisees and Sadducees who began to oppose Jesus. When He and the Twelve were alone again, He said: "Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees."

You know what Jesus meant when He said this; but the disciples said to themselves, "He says this 'because we have brought no bread.'"

When Jesus saw that they did not comprehend Him, He said: "How is it that ye do not understand that I spake it not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees?"

"Then understood they how that He bade them not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees."[1]

Undoubtedly, there were several among them whose testimony was becoming firm and unwavering. At any rate, we learn that just a few days later, the chief apostle gave evidence in words that could not be misunderstood, of his sure conviction that Christ was indeed the Son of the Living God.

Peter's Memorable Testimony.

They had gone northward to Caesarea Philippi at the foot of Mount Hermon. Here, Jesus, one day, asked His disciples this question: "Who do men say that I, the Son of man, am?"

They answered, "Some say thou art John the Baptist. Some say thou art Elias, and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets."

Then Jesus said, "But who say ye that I am?"

Simon Peter answered,

"Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God."

There is no hesitancy now, no fear, no wavering, no "we believe and are sure;" but the unqualified and direct expression of a soul convinced of the truth: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God."

"Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona," said Jesus, "for flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven."[2]

At last Jesus discovers the assurance in Peter for which He has been laboring many months to develop. He now knows that Peter's spirit has received divine assurance that all these miracles and mighty manifestations have been wrought by the power of God through His only Begotten Son. He knows that the testimony borne by Peter comes not from men but from God, and no matter what men may think or do, Peter will stand firm as a rock on this testimony.

"I say unto thee," continued Jesus, "that thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it."

Christ's Church Built Upon Revelation.

By that He meant that as Simon's name "Peter" means rock, so this testimony that comes by revelation shall be the rock upon which Christ's Church Christ's shall be built. Because when one receives such divine assurance in his soul that the gospel is true, no views of men, nor waves of temptation nor "the power of hell" can deprive him of it. You remember when Jesus first met Simon, He said He should be called "the Rock." Ever since then it would seem that Jesus has been waiting for the time when Peter's testimony would be like his character—expressive and firm. That time has come; and Peter is now prepared to receive a greater responsibility.

Keys of the Kingdom

"And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven."

One key was to open the door of the gospel to the Gentiles, but it took quite a while before Peter knew how to use it.

It is one thing to know that the gospel is true; it is quite another thing to comprehend its purpose and significance.

Jesus Foretells His Death.

From that time, Jesus began to tell the Apostles that He would suffer and die, and that they must carry on the preaching of the gospel. He told them Jesus that in a few months He would be taken by the chief priests, would be killed, and would rise again the third day.

Misguided Zeal.

When Peter heard this, he took the Savior off to one side, and still hoping that Jesus would some day be a king, said, "Far be it from Thee, Lord; this shall not be unto Thee." As much as to say, "They shall not take you if we can prevent it."

Rebuked Peter.

Brave but uncomprehending Peter! He does not realize that it is necessary for his Lord to die, before His mission of redemption is fulfilled. So he would, in his blinded love, prevent his Master from completing His work! The Savior perceiving this, turned and said unto Peter, "Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offense unto me; for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men."[3]

This was a severe rebuke, and it must have impressed Peter deeply with the thought that his plan was not God's plan; and he no doubt realized that there was yet very much for him to learn before he could carry out the great responsibility that the Lord had this day conferred upon him. But in his zeal to save Jesus from death, he erred, though only in love; and we can fancy hearing one of the others saying, in effect, in commendation of Peter's anxiety,

  "If he be not one that truly loves you,
  That errs in ignorance, and not in cunning,
  I have no judgment in an honest man's face."

At any rate, we know that Jesus was pleased with Peter's testimony, and with his love, and would patiently wait the unfolding of his mind in the comprehension of the gospel plan.

Footnotes:
1. Matt. 16:1-12.

2. Matt. 16:13-20.

3. Matt. 16:16-23.


LESSON 7
A Marvelous Manifestation

The Holy Mount.

In the region of Caesarea Philippi, where Peter gave his testimony and received a blessing and power from his Master, is a high mountain peak of the Lebanon range, known as Mt. Hermon. Peter called it the Holy Mount. When you learn of what took place there, you will agree that Peter gave it a good name.

One writer who has visited this region tells us that the "glittering splendor" of this peak, "towering like a giant above all other peaks of the Lebanon range, its head always covered with snow, is visible from every direction. It is in clear view as far south as the Dead Sea. It was probably the highest spot of earth on which our Lord ever stood, and from which He had His most extensive view. From it He looked down upon Galilee, where He had taught and wrought, where He had been received by the few and rejected by the many."[1]

Self-Denial Necessary.

Six days, (Luke says eight) had passed since Peter had borne his great testimony—six days, undoubtedly of important instruction to Peter and the other eleven. It was probably during that time that the Twelve learned that to be a true follower of Jesus, one must be able to deny one's self of many desires and appetites—one must learn to control feelings of anger, jealousy, and other passions. Said the Savior, "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

"For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it:

"And whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it.

"For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?"[2]

These and many other glorious truths, Peter undoubtedly heard during that memorable week at Caesarea Philippi.

But he was to see and hear things even more glorious.

Still perplexed over some of the sayings of Jesus, still wondering why it was necessary for their Lord to "suffer many things, and be rejected" and even put to death, Peter and James and John one night, accompanied Jesus up the side of Mt. Hermon. It appears from the brief accounts we have of this incident that they spent several hours in solemn conversation, the apostles "asking Him many questions concerning His sayings."

The Transfiguration.

Twilight deepened into darkness, and the shades of night completely hid Mt. Hermon from the sleeping vales below. Perhaps the three leaders became drowsy; and as their Lord withdrew a little apart to pray, they may have fallen, for a moment or two, into a sleep—Luke tells us that they were "heavy with sleep." Be that as it may, we know that when their eyes were turned toward Jesus, "He was transfigured before them. And His raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so white as no fuller on earth can white them."

"And there appeared unto them Elias and Moses, and they were talking with Jesus."[3]

Death but a Change.

These heavenly personages talked, not to Jesus but with him, about His approaching death, and resurrection, one of the vital things in Christ's ministry which Peter could not comprehend. Surely after this glorious vision of two heavenly beings. Death would lose much if not all its terror for Peter, James, and John. They would know that even if wicked men did kill their Master, that He would still live and still be their Lord and Savior. Death, to them, after this, would be just a "departure." They would realize that "Death hath nothing terrible in it, but what life hath made so."

"It is Good to be Here."

Peter by inspiration had received assurances that Jesus was indeed the Christ; now he witnessed a visible sign of his testimony. Desiring to have a monument to this outward sign, something which other eyes beside his might behold, he cried, out of the impulsiveness of his heart, "Master, it is good for us to be here, and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias." But suddenly, as Moses and Elias "departed," a cloud overshadowed them and a voice came out of the cloud saying, "This is My beloved Son hear Him!"

Sources of Testimony.

Peter's testimony was, by this time, made strong and his faith proved:[4]

(1) By the confirmation of miracles; (2) By seeing heavenly beings; (3) By inspiration; (4) By hearing not only the testimony of these angels but the Divine testimony of God Himself!

Surely his faith is now built upon the Rock, and the gates of hell cannot prevail against it!

This is true; and henceforth, we may safely conclude as we follow his career, that not a shadow of doubt of the divinity of Christ's mission ever crosses Peter's mind.

When we think of Peter having been in almost daily contact with the Savior of men, we may conclude that his testimony grew very slowly, but if so, like the oak tree that grows slowly to, it was all the more enduring.

Purity and Sincerity Essentials.

After all, Peter's experience is the experience that will come to nearly all the boys and girls who read these pages. The knowledge of truth, and the testimony of the Gospel may come gradually to most of them. The one great lesson for them to learn even in youth is, that purity of thought, and a sincere heart seeking the Savior's guidance daily will lead to a testimony of the truth of Christ's Gospel as sure and permanent as that which Peter possessed as he descended Mt. Hermon after seeing the transfiguration of Christ, and hearing the voice of God testify to His divinity.

But knowing that Jesus is the Savior of mankind, did not give Peter a comprehension of the Gospel plan. In this regard, he had yet much to learn. And, it may be, that his strength of character, or shall we say, his judgment, was not yet so sound as it should have been in a man whose whole life should be as firm as a rock.

In the strength of his testimony, and in a somewhat resigned attitude to the fate that sooner or later was to befall his Master, Peter continued to ask many questions, pertaining to the vital aspects of Christ's mission. One of these which the apostles asked themselves as they came down towards the crowd at the foot of the hill, was, What did the Master mean when He said the Son of Man would rise from the dead?

While the Savior was answering this question, and explaining prophecies relating to it, they came to the place where, the evening before, they had left the other disciples. A great multitude had gathered about them, and the scribes were questioning them.

The Afflicted Boy.

In the midst of this crowd was a little boy sorely afflicted by an evil spirit. When he was "possessed," he fell to the ground, foamed at the mouth, gnashed his teeth, and pined away. The father met Jesus, and begged Him to relieve his poor boy, and added that the disciples had tried but could not.

"How long a time is it," asked Jesus, "since this came unto him?" "When a child," the father said; "and ofttimes it hath cast him into fire and into the waters, to destroy him, but if thou canst, I ask thee to have compassion on us, and help us."

Jesus rebuked the foul spirit, and the little boy was healed.

A Contrast.

To Peter, James, and John what a contrast was this scene to the one they beheld the night before on the Mount! Here was manifest the power of the evil one, causing suspicions, pain, agony, death; there was manifest the power of the Holy One, proclaiming happiness, peace, glory, and immortality! Such have been the results of these two powers as they have influenced the lives of men in all ages. Such is the result today. A vital question for us is, Shall we hover around the foothills of sin where the evil one is triumphant, or shall we at least show a willingness to climb the mount of Holiness and let God transform our lives?

  "'Tis not for man to trifle; life is brief,
  And sin is here.
  Our age is but the falling leaf,
  A dropping tear.
  We have no time to sport away the hours,
  All must be earnest in a world like ours."

Footnotes:
1. Weed.

2. Matt. 16:24-26.

3. Matt. 17:1-8; Mark 9:1-6.

4. Peter 1:7.


LESSON 8
Lessons in True Leadership.

"Character is built out of circumstances. From exactly the same materials one man builds palaces, while another builds hovels."

Between the Transfiguration and the last eventful week of the Savior's life on earth, there are only a few recorded instances in scripture with which Peter is personally mentioned. It is significant, however, that nearly everyone of these, bears either directly or indirectly upon the moulding of Peter's character as an Apostolic leader. Peter knows that Jesus is the Christ that should come, but has he strength to defend Him in word and deed? Does he comprehend the divine principles of the Gospel sufficiently to manifest them in his daily life and conversation and in all his associations with his fellowmen? With the probable exception of the tribute money incident, which emphasized for Peter the divine Sonship of his Master, all the lessons following bear directly upon strength of character and principles of conduct.

TRIBUTE
An Ancient Law.

In those days, there was a tax levied upon every male Jew of twenty years old and upwards for the maintenance of the Temple and its services. This law had been in force ever since the days of the children of Israel when the great lawgiver, Moses, said a "half shekel shall be the offering of the Lord."[1]

Matthew tells us that "When they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute money, came to Peter and said, "Doth not your Master pay tribute?"[2] "Yes," promptly answered Peter.

If he knew when he was talking to the tax-gatherers, that "there was no money in the bag," he must have wondered how the half-shekel due as tribute could have been paid that day.

Children of the Kingdom Free.

When Peter went back into the house, Jesus anticipated what he was going to say, and asked Him, "Of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?

"Of strangers," answered Peter.

"Then are the children free," said Jesus, meaning that since this tribute money was for the maintenance of His Father's house, He, the Son, would not have to pay it; but he added:

"Lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money: that take and give unto them for me and thee."

This experience must have impressed Peter with the fact that it is better to suffer offense than to give offense.

A LESSON IN FORGIVENESS
About this same time, Peter asked the question:

"Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Till seven times?"[3]

Perhaps Peter had already been required to settle some difficulty between angry men, or it may be that he had been provoked during a dispute that arose among the disciples as to who was the greatest among them. If some one had taunted him several times about his being the greatest, it is quite probable that his patience was exhausted. At any rate, he wanted to know if there is a limit to the number of times a man should forgive his brother. What a lesson Jesus taught this impetuous apostle when he answered,

"I say not unto thee, until seven times; but until seventy times seven."[4]

Then, to make the teaching more impressive, the Lord told them the parable of the unmerciful debtor.

A certain king took account of his servants for those who had collected his revenue, and found that one owed him ten thousand talents or about fifteen million dollars. This debt the servant could not pay, so the king commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had.[5]

The servant begged for mercy saying, "Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all."

"Then the Lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt." The master not only had pity for the unfortunate debtor, but freed him from prison, let him keep his wife and children, and cancelled the debt.

The Ungrateful Servant.

But that same servant went out and found one of his fellow-servants who owed him a hundred pence, more than ten hundred thousand times less than the first servant had owed his master.

Seizing the fellow-servant by the throat and choking him, he demanded, "Pay me that thou owest."

The fellow-servant fell down at his feet and begged for mercy, "Have patience with me and I will pay thee all."

But the unforgiving, merciless servant refusing to give pity, "went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt."

So when the Lord heard how the servant whom he had forgiven had treated his fellow-servant, he called that servant back, and said:

"O thou wicked servant! I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me; should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow-servant, even as I had pity on thee?"

This unforgiving servant was then told to pay the ten thousand talents, and was delivered over to the "tormentors" until it was all paid.

Then concluded the Savior: "So likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses."

Do you think Peter would ever forget that lesson?

THE REWARD OF SACRIFICE
The Rich Young Ruler

One day Peter and others listened to a conversation between their Lord and a rich young ruler. He was a young man, rich, and, as painted by the old masters, very handsome. But with all, he had kept himself morally clean, and desired to get eternal life.[6] But his heart was set upon his riches; so when the Savior said, "Sell all thou hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come, follow me," the young ruler went away very sorrowful.

Then Peter said, "Lo, we have left all and followed thee." As much as to say, Lord we have left everything for Thee, now what shall be our reward? Jesus said:

"There is no man who has left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of God's sake, who shall not receive manifold more in this present time; and in the world to come, life everlasting."

"But," He added, "there are many who make themselves first, that shall be last; and the last first."

Humility.

This last statement must have contained for Peter, the first among the Twelve, an important lesson in Humility.

A LESSON IN FAITH
It was probably on Tuesday of the last week that Jesus spent with His apostles, that Peter called attention to the result of a divine curse.

The Barren Fig Tree.

A day or so before this, Jesus had gone out of His way to get some figs from a tree that stood some distance off. When he found that the tree bore no fruit He said it should never bear fruit again.

On this Tuesday morning as the disciples were passing by, "they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots."

"And Peter calling to remembrance said unto Him, Master, behold the fig tree which Thou cursedst is withered away."

Power of Faith.

Jesus answered: "Have faith in God. For verily I say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith."[7]

On that same day, Peter was undoubtedly with the Twelve on the Mount of Olives when they asked Jesus "privately" about the destruction of the Temple.[8]

Keep Commandments.

To Peter and to all He said: "Watch ye therefore, and pray always, and keep my commandments, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things which shall come to pass and to stand before the Son of Man when He shall come clothed in the glory of His Father."

Footnotes:
1. Ex. 30:13.

2. Matt. 17:24-27.

3. Matt. 18:21.

4. Matt. 18:22

5. See II Kings 4:1; Lev. 25:39.

6. Read Luke 18:18-30.

7. Mark 11:22-28.

8. Mark 13; Matt. 24; Luke 21.


LESSON 9
ON THE NIGHT OF THE BETRAYAL

"The weakest spot in every man, is where he thinks himself the wisest."

IN THE UPPER ROOM
On Thursday of the Passion Week, Jesus called Peter and John to Him, and said: "Go, and prepare us the passover, that we may eat."[1]

The Passover.

The Passover, you remember, is the name given to the feast established to commemorate the time when the destroying angel passed over the houses of the Hebrews, which had been marked by the blood of the lamb. At this festsival, a lamb was killed, and called the Paschal Lamb. It was on the day that "the passover must be killed" that Peter and John were requested to make preparation.

"Where wilt thou that we prepare?" they asked.

An Upper Room Prepared.

"When ye have entered into the city," replied Jesus, "there shall a man meet you bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the house where he entereth in. Ask him, Where is the guest chamber, where I shall eat the Passover with my disciples? And he shall show you a large upper room furnished; there make ready."[2]

The two apostles did as they were directed, found everything just as the Lord had stated, and made the necessary preparations.

At the appointed hour Jesus and the Twelve gathered in this upper room. Some think it was in Mark's house, some the house of Joseph of Arimathea, but we do not know, nor does it much matter. We are interested most in what took place there.

A Solemn Meeting.

Jesus sat at the head of the feast. On one side, close enough to recline on His Master's breast sat John, and on the other side sat Peter. It was, perhaps, the most solemn meeting at which the Twelve had ever gathered; for the Savior said at the beginning:

"With desire," that is with longing earnestness, "I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer: For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled which is written in the prophets concerning me."

Meaning that His hour had come when His enemies should take Him and put Him to death.

Near the end of the supper, Jesus rose from where He was reclining, laid aside His outer garments, took a towel and tied it around His waist, thus assuming a servant's dress. He then took a basin of water and proceeded to wash the disciples' feet.

Jesus Washeth Disciples' Feet.

It may be that the Savior had detected in the minds of some the same thought which had caused a dispute among them once before, as to who was the greatest among them. Perhaps this thought arose when they saw Peter and John occupying the places of honor. At any rate, their Lord, the greatest among them, assumed the attitude of servant, the least and humblest of them all.

Peter Objects.

When He came to Peter, the latter said: "Lord, dost Thou wash my feet?" Peter would serve his Master, but his Master must never serve him!

"What I do thou knowest not now: but thou shalt know hereafter," answered Jesus.

"Thou needst not to wash my feet."

"If I wash thee not," continued Jesus, "thou hast no part with me."

When Peter thought that his refusal to submit to be served by the Lord, was really putting the Savior away from him, he said,

"Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head."

An Example.

"So after He had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again. He said unto them: Know ye what I have done to you? Ye call me Master and Lord; and ye say well, for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you."

Thus did these twelve men receive in an impressive and practical manner, the divine lesson of service. Thus did they learn that those who were greatest among them were really the servants of all. Indeed, in the Church of Christ, there are no masters and no servants, but all working for every one and each one for all.

"One of You Shall Betray Me."

Immediately following this impressive and sacred ceremony, the full significance of which very few understand, the Savior said, "One of you shall betray me."

This announcement cast a gloom over all. To make it caused "trouble" to come over Christ's "spirit;" and to hear it, made all "exceeding sorrowful."[3]

They began to inquire among themselves which one of them should be so faithless; and soon each asked the Master, "Lord, is it I?"

Judas, last of all answered and said, "Lord, is it I?"

Jesus' answer, "Thou hast said," must not have been heard by the others, because Peter beckoned to John to ask the Master "who it should be of whom he spoke."

Jesus replied, also in a quiet manner, "He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it."

Judas Iscariot.

When he had dipped the sop, he handed it to Judas Iscariot. Peter and John, then, knew who the traitor was; but the others probably did not; for they wondered what Jesus meant when He said to Judas: "That thou doest do quickly."

LOYALTY AS PETER FELT IT
After the traitor went out into the night—oh such a night for him! Jesus continued to teach and to comfort the Eleven.

Love One Another.

"A new commandment I give unto you," He said, "That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another."

Among other things, He said, referring to His approaching death, "Whither I go ye cannot come."

This stirred Peter's love and he inquired, "Lord, why cannot I follow Thee now? I will lay down my life for Thy sake."[4]

Peter to Be Tried.

"Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired you that he may sift you as wheat. But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not; and when thou art converted, [that is, "brought back afresh as a penitent disciple"] strengthen thy brethren."[5]

This grieved Peter very deeply. To think that his Master would even suspect that he, Peter, would even weaken in his steadfastness to his Lord! (It is significant that the Lord called him by his old name, Simon).

Peter protested, saying, "Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into prison, and to death."[6]

A Prophecy.

"I tell you, Peter," continued the Savior, "that the cock shall not crow this day, before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me."

But, he spake the more vehemently. "Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise so said they all."[7]

Peter meant every word he said, and he felt deeply the truth of what he spake; but his real strength had not come to him yet, and his Master knew it. It would come but it would be "Born in the deep silence of a long-suffering heart."

LOYALTY AS PETER ACTED IT
Gethsemane.

Later in the night, the company left the upper room, crossed the brook Kedron, and went to the Garden of Gethsemane, on the west side of the Mount of Olives.

Bidding eight of the Eleven to remain together. He took the other three, Peter, James, and John, apart. His soul "was exceeding sorrowful even unto death."

He said, "Tarry ye here, and watch with me."

"Not My Will but Thine be Done."

Soon He withdrew a little from them, and prayed. The Apostles could see Him, perhaps could hear Him, as He cried, "Father, if it be possible let this cup pass; nevertheless not my will, but thine be done."

When he returned, and found the three sleeping, He said, "Simon [Simon again] sleepest thou? Couldst not thou watch one hour?"

"Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation."

"The spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak."[8]

Peter and His Brethren Drowsy.

A second time He withdrew; a second time returned; a second time found them sleeping; "for their eyes were heavy; neither knew they what to answer Him."

When He returned the third time, He said kindly, "Sleep on now and take your rest; it is enough, the hour is come; behold the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners."

After a little longer sleep, the three were awakened by Jesus, only to see approaching "a great multitude, with swords and staves, from the chief priests, and the scribes and the elders." At their head was Judas who approached his Lord, and betrayed Him with a kiss.

Peter Defends His Lord.

As soldiers went to lay hands upon Jesus, Peter, who was now thoroughly aroused, jumped to the rescue of his Master, "drew his sword, and smote a servant of the high priest and cut off his ear."

This servant, whose right ear Peter struck off with one blow, was called Malchus.

A Lesson.

"Put up thy sword into the sheath," commanded the Savior, "the cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?" What a lesson to Peter! Even though duty led to suffering and death, yet would the Lord not waver in His strength.

Then said Jesus, "Suffer ye thus far, and He touched his ear and healed him."[9]

As the officers led Jesus away, the disciples "all forsook Him, and fled."

Peter Follows Jesus.

Peter's strength and loyalty were wavering; but he could not bring himself to flee with the others. Neither could he conclude that it was best to go with Jesus; so he did neither, but "followed Him afar off, even unto the palace of the high priest."

At first, he remained on the outside, but later ventured in where the servants were sitting.

WEAKNESS BRINGS MISERY
While Peter was standing by the stove warming himself, a girl came in, and recognizing him as one who had been with Jesus, said, "Thou, also wast with Jesus of Galilee."

In a Moment of Weakness.

"I know not what thou sayest," said Peter before them all.

He then stepped out on the porch, perhaps to cool his burning conscience or to try to collect himself to know what best to do.

A man seeing him there cried out, "This man was also with Jesus of Nazareth."

"I do not know the man," said Simon; and this time he took an oath.

One of the servants of the high priest, who was related to Malchus approached Peter a little later, and said, "Did I not see thee in the Garden with Him?"[10]

Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, "Man, I know not what thou sayest." At that moment, Peter heard the cock crow.

Sorrow.

Almost immediately, too, the Savior passing near him, "turned and looked upon Peter." Then recalling the words of his Lord, "Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice."[11] Peter went out and wept bitterly.

Footnotes:
1. Luke 22:8.

2. Luke 22:11-12.

3. Matt. 26:22.

4. John 13:34-37.

5. Luke 22:31, 32.

6. Luke 22:33.

7. Matt. 26:35.

8. Mark 14:38.

9. Luke 22:51.

10. John 18:26.

11. Luke 22:61.


LESSON 10
OUT OF GLOOM, INTO LIGHT

"Strength is born in the deep silence of long-suffering hearts, not amidst joy."

Out of Weakness, Strength.

It is said when Peter "went out speechless from the face of all, * * * and filled the silence, weeping bitterly," that his grief was so heavy that he remained alone all day during Friday and Saturday following the Savior's crucifixion. If so, his sorrow for what he had done was made all the more acute as he recalled the many kind words the Savior had spoken to him, and the many, many happy moments he had spent in the Lord's company. Every word and act and look associated with his Master would flash upon his mind with a new meaning. Perhaps for the first time in his life, he now fully realized why the Lord had desired his nature and faith to be as "The Rock." Through the mist of his bitter tears, he saw all the true attributes of manhood as they were personified in Jesus—Reverence, Brotherliness, Patience, Sincerity, Courage. These and many other noble traits made Jesus appear to him now more holy than ever. But the more clearly Peter saw Christ's strength and holiness, the more clearly he realized his own littleness and misery. This last manifestation of his weakness, which led him to deny his Lord, made him see himself in a new light, and it had a decisive effect upon him. Out of the "deep silence" of his suffering, those two days, there was born that strength which Christ had urged upon him ever since He called him "Peter."

A Sad Meeting.

It must have been a sad meeting when John and Peter first came together after the Crucifixion. When it was or where, we are not told; but we are sure that John must have recognized a great change in his fellow-apostle. Out of the haggard look and the deep lines of grief there must have shone a humility which John had never before seen in Peter's face. We can only imagine what Peter's feelings were as he listened to John tell of all that had happened before Herod and Pilate, and at the Cross. Mingling with Peter's grief was the keen disappointment that their Messiah, their King, was not to free the Jews and rule over them as he had hoped. In doubt as to what to do, they probably decided to visit the place where their Master had been laid, and then return to their former vocation as fishermen.

At the Sepulchre.

But there was one whose love and devotion took her to the tomb even before the Apostles. Mary Magdalene, "while it was yet dark" approached the place where she thought Jesus slept in death. But instead of seeing her Lord's body in the cold, dark sepulchre, around which there was nothing but gloom and sorrow, she found an empty tomb. In alarm, she ran to Peter and John, and breathlessly cried, "They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre." "Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the sepulchre." At first, they ran together, but Peter already weary with suffering, was soon out-distanced by the younger Apostle John, who reached the place first.

"And stooping down, and looking in, he saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in."

Just to look in, however, did not satisfy Peter; for as soon as he came, he "went into the sepulchre." John followed him. They noticed the napkin that had been on Jesus' head wrapped and placed by itself; the linen clothes, too, were folded neatly and placed aside with care. They concluded that thieves would not have done this, and so dispelled Mary's theory that the Lord's body had been stolen. But "as yet they knew not the scripture that He must rise again from the dead."

Mary Beholds Risen Redeemer.

Filled with wonder and perplexity, the two disciples "went away again to their own home," but Mary lingered near the tomb, and as a reward for her faithfulness and devotion, became the first person in the world to behold the risen Redeemer.

Peter Sees His Lord.

Other women who came to the tomb that morning to render, as they thought, the last slight service to their Lord, were permitted also to see Him. Later on that same day, it seems that He appeared to Peter; but where, or under what circumstances, or what was said, we do not know. We may rest assured, however, that Peter's repentant soul was filled with joy eternal as he received the divine forgiveness of His Lord.

Disciples From Emmans.

That evening as the Eleven were assembled in a room talking over the events of the day, and particularly the Lord's appearance to Peter, there entered two disciples from Emmaus. They were no sooner in the presence of the Eleven, than they heard the joyous message, "The Lord is risen indeed and hath appeared unto Simon." They could readily believe this, for they said, "When we were returning from Jerusalem, today, after having heard of the angels and the empty tomb, Jesus Himself drew near and went with us."

Jesus Appears to Eleven.

While they were thus assembled, Jesus appeared to them again, "and saith unto them. Peace be unto you." Such scenes as that cannot be described, and the evangelists who tell us about it simply state the fact and leave us to imagine what their thoughts and feelings were on that glorious occasion. We are sure, though, that we can say of Peter as has been written of the Prophet Joseph when he, too, saw the Savior,

  "O what rapture filled his bosom,
  For he saw the living God."

THE FISHERMAN BECOMES THE SHEPHERD
On Sea of Tiberias.

Several days after this, Peter and six other disciples were back on the sea of Tiberias, fishing. They were in Galilee, evidently waiting to meet the Lord there as He had promised. One evening, as if Peter had almost despaired of waiting, he said to the others,

"I'm going a fishing."

"We also go with thee," said they.

They entered into a boat immediately, and let down their nets. They toiled all night, and caught nothing, just as some of them had done on a memorable occasion several months before.

As morning dawned, they saw a man standing on the shore, but in the distance, they could not tell who he was. Suddenly the man cried,

"Sirs, have ye any meat?"

"No," was their reply.

Many Fish Caught.

"Cast the net on the right side of the ship and ye shall find," said the man.

They did so, and caught so many fish that they could scarcely draw in the net.

John, whose loving eyes were made more keen by a loving heart, rushed to Peter's side and whispered, "It is the Lord."

Instantly, Peter knew John spoke the truth, and man of action that he was, he put on his fisherman's coat, plunged into the sea, and hastened to the feet of his Master. The others came in the little ship, dragging the net of fishes.

Jesus had already started a fire, and' was cooking them something to eat. After the greetings, He said, "Bring of the fish which ye have now caught."

Peter was the leader in going to the net and in drawing it to the land. While the fish were cooking, the disciples counted the number caught, and found that in that one draught there were one hundred and fifty-three: "and for all there were so many, yet was the net not broken."

Peter a Shepherd of Christ's Fold.

Jesus had shown them where to catch the fish, He had started the fire on which to cook them, and now "He taketh the bread and giveth them and the fish likewise." Surely these little incidents would tend to impress them with the truth that if they "would seek first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness all else will be added." At any rate, this is the lesson taught on that great occasion: The apostles were not now to spend their lives seeking the things which perish, but in searching for souls that will endure throughout all eternity. Many are now together in the fold of Christ, and the shepherd is called away. Henceforward Peter and his associates must be the keepers of this flock.

When they had broken their fast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?"

"Yea, Lord," answered Peter, "Thou knowest that I love Thee."

"Feed my lambs." That is, Take care of the little ones in my Church. Do not let them go astray in paths that will lead them to sin and misery.

He saith unto him again the second time,

"Simon, son of Jonas lovest thou me?"

"Yea, Lord, Thou knowest that I love Thee."

"Feed my sheep." Keep the older ones together and give them the words of life as thou hast received them from me.

A third time Jesus said,

"Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?"

And Peter, somewhat grieved, answered, "Lord, thou knowest all things; Thou knowest that I love Thee."

"Feed my sheep."

Duty First.

And then the Savior admonished Peter not always to follow his own inclinations, and impulsive nature; but ever to do his duty as the Shepherd of the Fold. When Peter was young, and did not have the knowledge and responsibility he now possessed, he could go fishing, and make money, or study, or do whatever he wished, but now he must attend to his duties in the Kingdom of God no matter what might come to him personally in doing so. Even though Peter's duty led to the cross, the Savior said, "Follow me."

While this conversation was going on, Jesus and Peter were walking alone a little ahead of the others. Peter turned, and saw John following close to them.

"Lord," said Peter, "what is John to do?"

"If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee, follow thou me." As much as to say, Just attend faithfully to your duty, Peter, teach others to do the same, and all will be well.

This is the last recorded word of Christ to Peter; but he was present of course when the Savior gave His final charge to the Twelve.[1]

From this time Peter's zeal in the Work of the Ministry was constant, and his boldness unsubdued.

LESSON 5
Peter's Faith Tested

"The steps of faith fall on the seeming void, but find the rock beneath."

"All I have seen teaches me to trust the Creator for all I have not seen."

Genuine Faith.

When Jesus called Simon "Peter" or "The Rock," he undoubtedly expressed in that name one characteristic which He desired to see in the faith of His disciples, and particularly in each of His Apostles. He desired them to possess a faith that was unwavering,—a faith that would make them steadfast in the truth regardless of miracles or the acts of men—a faith that would trust the Lord at all times and under all circumstances, let those times and circumstances be what they may. Jesus knew that the Jews were easily influenced; that a miracle performed today might awaken a feeling in them that He was the King for whom they had been waiting, and that a truth taught tomorrow might arouse in them a feeling that He was an impostor. He wanted to lead them to God and to His Gospel. He longed to have them comprehend the truths of life so they would live them after He was gone from their midst.

Jesus Grieved.

Imagine, then, how grieved He must have been when, after the miracle mentioned in the last chapter, the people arose and hailed Him King and thought by offering Him the bauble of an empty crown, they were doing Him honor! He did not want them to honor Him. His desire was for them to see the power of God, and believe in His divine truth.

Desiring to be alone once more with His Father, not wanting the company even of the three chief apostles, Peter, James, and John, Jesus dismissed the multitude, told the Twelve to get into the ship and sail back to Capernaum, and He retired to a solitary place to pray.

A TEMPESTUOUS SEA
A Storm.

During the night, while Jesus was yet praying, a great storm arose, which stirred the lake into a seething mass of billows. From the mountain Jesus could see His disciples battling with the sea, but unable to make much headway, although they could not see Him.

When the ship was about thirty furlongs (four miles) from the shore, Jesus decided to go into it. It was now past midnight, and the disciples were still struggling in the midst of the heaving sea.

Jesus on the Water.

Imagine their fear when through the darkness they saw an object coming towards them on the waves! And when someone cried out, "It's a Spirit!" they were more frightened than ever.

"But straightway Jesus spoke unto them, saying. Be of good cheer; It is I; be not afraid."

At once, Peter spoke out, saying, "Lord, if it be Thou, bid me come unto Thee on the water."[1]

Peter's Faith.

"Come," said Jesus.

"And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Jesus."

Peter, firm in belief and strong in determination, when your eye sees only the majesty of faith and the perfect manifestation of its power! Mighty and fearless when your eye sees only the glory of God, and your soul cries out to go to Him!

His Doubt.

But when you see "the wind boisterous," you are afraid; and beginning to sink, cry, saying, "Lord, save me."

So it is in life: when the winds of temptation and the waves of despair beat upon us, the eye of faith is turned more upon these raging elements than upon the Light of Life, the power of faith is thus weakened, and as Peter, we begin to sink. Too many, ah, too many go down beneath the billows; only a few cry out as he. "Lord, save us!"

And immediately Jesus stretched forth His hand, and caught him, and said unto him, "O, thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?"

ANOTHER TEST
In Capernaum.

Next morning, the people in Capernaum who knew that Peter and the other disciples had left the opposite shore without Jesus, were very much astonished to see Him in their midst, and said, Rabbi, when camest thou hither?

"Ye seek me," answered Jesus, "not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled."

Lord, save me.

"Lord, save me."

"Labor not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you."[2]

Sermon on the Bread of Life.

He then delivered the famous sermon on the Bread of Life, part of which, as John remembered it, is recorded in John the sixth chapter. There were so many things spoken which the Jews could not understand, because of their prejudice, that they first became confused, then angry, and finally much offended. Those who had only a little faith, became influenced by the murmuring crowd, and said, "We don't believe this man is the Son of God." Even some of His disciples turned away from the Truth, and "walked no more with Him."

Men Swerved by Doubt.

The mass of angry men and women became much like the heaving sea that tossed the disciples the evening before. The winds of ridicule and the waves of discontent beat against the wavering disciples. As they looked upon these angry elements of human passion, their faith in Christ weakened, and they "began to sink."

Jesus Appeals to the Twelve.

In vain, Jesus testified, "It is I, the Son of man!" They would not listen to Him, for He was to them only the son of Joseph the carpenter. As group after group turned their backs upon Him. He turned to the Twelve and said, "Will ye also go away?"

Peter's Answer.

Again it was Peter who broke the silence. With the others, he had looked at the noisy crowd, with the others he had listened to the angry words hurled at their Master. In the midst of this sea of human passion, shall he say, "Lord, if it be Thee, bid me come unto Thee?"

As if he wavered just a little, as if his faith had not yet become as firm as Jesus would have it become, he answered, "Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life."

Belief Matures into Knowledge.

Then, as his assurance became stronger and his thoughts turned from the apostate crowd, he added, "And we believe—and are sure that thou are the Christ, the Son of the living God." Though there came not from Jesus' lips at this time, the word "Blessed," yet, undoubtedly, He was gratified indeed to see the wavering faith of His disciples become steadfast in the heart of His Apostles, as if they would say,

  "Then come the wild weather, come sleet or come snow,
  We will stand by each other, however it blow.
  Oppression and sickness, and sorrow, and pain
  Shall be to our true love as links in a chain."

Footnotes:
1. Matt. 14:28.

2. John 6:25-27.


LESSON 6
Peter's Testimony

At Tyre and Sidon.

Very soon after the people of Capernaum rejected the Savior, as narrated in the previous chapter, Jesus took His Twelve disciples westward across Galilee into the land of Tyre and Sidon, near the Mediterranean Sea. He desired to be alone with the Twelve that He might teach them many things pertaining to the kingdom of God, and thus prepare them for carrying on the work, after He should leave them.

There were many things happened on this tour which must have made it a memorable one to Peter and the other members of the Twelve. First, there was the Gentile woman who sought Jesus, and implored Him to come and heal her little daughter.

A Syro-Phoenician Woman.

Because she did not belong to the Jewish race, the disciples said: "Master, send this woman away, for she is a trouble to us, crying out after us." Of course, they thought then, and a long time afterwards, that the Gospel was only for the Jews. But Jesus taught them that He loved the Gentile woman just as well as He did the Jews. But Peter did not fully understand.

Other Miracles.

From the coast of Tyre and Sidon, they traveled around Galilee and came to the east side of the Sea of Galilee. Here the disciples witnessed further manifestations of the power of Jesus. A deaf man who could not speak plainly was made to hear and to speak; and when the people heard about it, they followed Jesus and the Twelve out of the village into "a desert place."

Again Peter saw a multitude of people fed; this time from only seven loaves and a few small fishes.

It would seem that after all these months with the Savior—hearing His parables, seeing His miracles, feeling His spirit and receiving His teachings daily, the apostles would surely understand the mission of the Redeemer.

Jesus' Sayings Not Understood.

But we read that after these "four thousand men besides women and children" were fed, the disciples entered with Jesus into a boat and rowed across to the west side of the lake. Here they met some Pharisees and Sadducees who began to oppose Jesus. When He and the Twelve were alone again, He said: "Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees."

You know what Jesus meant when He said this; but the disciples said to themselves, "He says this 'because we have brought no bread.'"

When Jesus saw that they did not comprehend Him, He said: "How is it that ye do not understand that I spake it not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees?"

"Then understood they how that He bade them not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees."[1]

Undoubtedly, there were several among them whose testimony was becoming firm and unwavering. At any rate, we learn that just a few days later, the chief apostle gave evidence in words that could not be misunderstood, of his sure conviction that Christ was indeed the Son of the Living God.

Peter's Memorable Testimony.

They had gone northward to Caesarea Philippi at the foot of Mount Hermon. Here, Jesus, one day, asked His disciples this question: "Who do men say that I, the Son of man, am?"

They answered, "Some say thou art John the Baptist. Some say thou art Elias, and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets."

Then Jesus said, "But who say ye that I am?"

Simon Peter answered,

"Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God."

There is no hesitancy now, no fear, no wavering, no "we believe and are sure;" but the unqualified and direct expression of a soul convinced of the truth: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God."

"Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona," said Jesus, "for flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven."[2]

At last Jesus discovers the assurance in Peter for which He has been laboring many months to develop. He now knows that Peter's spirit has received divine assurance that all these miracles and mighty manifestations have been wrought by the power of God through His only Begotten Son. He knows that the testimony borne by Peter comes not from men but from God, and no matter what men may think or do, Peter will stand firm as a rock on this testimony.

"I say unto thee," continued Jesus, "that thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it."

Christ's Church Built Upon Revelation.

By that He meant that as Simon's name "Peter" means rock, so this testimony that comes by revelation shall be the rock upon which Christ's Church Christ's shall be built. Because when one receives such divine assurance in his soul that the gospel is true, no views of men, nor waves of temptation nor "the power of hell" can deprive him of it. You remember when Jesus first met Simon, He said He should be called "the Rock." Ever since then it would seem that Jesus has been waiting for the time when Peter's testimony would be like his character—expressive and firm. That time has come; and Peter is now prepared to receive a greater responsibility.

Keys of the Kingdom

"And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven."

One key was to open the door of the gospel to the Gentiles, but it took quite a while before Peter knew how to use it.

It is one thing to know that the gospel is true; it is quite another thing to comprehend its purpose and significance.

Jesus Foretells His Death.

From that time, Jesus began to tell the Apostles that He would suffer and die, and that they must carry on the preaching of the gospel. He told them Jesus that in a few months He would be taken by the chief priests, would be killed, and would rise again the third day.

Misguided Zeal.

When Peter heard this, he took the Savior off to one side, and still hoping that Jesus would some day be a king, said, "Far be it from Thee, Lord; this shall not be unto Thee." As much as to say, "They shall not take you if we can prevent it."

Rebuked Peter.

Brave but uncomprehending Peter! He does not realize that it is necessary for his Lord to die, before His mission of redemption is fulfilled. So he would, in his blinded love, prevent his Master from completing His work! The Savior perceiving this, turned and said unto Peter, "Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offense unto me; for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men."[3]

This was a severe rebuke, and it must have impressed Peter deeply with the thought that his plan was not God's plan; and he no doubt realized that there was yet very much for him to learn before he could carry out the great responsibility that the Lord had this day conferred upon him. But in his zeal to save Jesus from death, he erred, though only in love; and we can fancy hearing one of the others saying, in effect, in commendation of Peter's anxiety,

  "If he be not one that truly loves you,
  That errs in ignorance, and not in cunning,
  I have no judgment in an honest man's face."

At any rate, we know that Jesus was pleased with Peter's testimony, and with his love, and would patiently wait the unfolding of his mind in the comprehension of the gospel plan.

Footnotes:
1. Matt. 16:1-12.

2. Matt. 16:13-20.

3. Matt. 16:16-23.


LESSON 7
A Marvelous Manifestation

The Holy Mount.

In the region of Caesarea Philippi, where Peter gave his testimony and received a blessing and power from his Master, is a high mountain peak of the Lebanon range, known as Mt. Hermon. Peter called it the Holy Mount. When you learn of what took place there, you will agree that Peter gave it a good name.

One writer who has visited this region tells us that the "glittering splendor" of this peak, "towering like a giant above all other peaks of the Lebanon range, its head always covered with snow, is visible from every direction. It is in clear view as far south as the Dead Sea. It was probably the highest spot of earth on which our Lord ever stood, and from which He had His most extensive view. From it He looked down upon Galilee, where He had taught and wrought, where He had been received by the few and rejected by the many."[1]

Self-Denial Necessary.

Six days, (Luke says eight) had passed since Peter had borne his great testimony—six days, undoubtedly of important instruction to Peter and the other eleven. It was probably during that time that the Twelve learned that to be a true follower of Jesus, one must be able to deny one's self of many desires and appetites—one must learn to control feelings of anger, jealousy, and other passions. Said the Savior, "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

"For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it:

"And whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it.

"For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?"[2]

These and many other glorious truths, Peter undoubtedly heard during that memorable week at Caesarea Philippi.

But he was to see and hear things even more glorious.

Still perplexed over some of the sayings of Jesus, still wondering why it was necessary for their Lord to "suffer many things, and be rejected" and even put to death, Peter and James and John one night, accompanied Jesus up the side of Mt. Hermon. It appears from the brief accounts we have of this incident that they spent several hours in solemn conversation, the apostles "asking Him many questions concerning His sayings."

The Transfiguration.

Twilight deepened into darkness, and the shades of night completely hid Mt. Hermon from the sleeping vales below. Perhaps the three leaders became drowsy; and as their Lord withdrew a little apart to pray, they may have fallen, for a moment or two, into a sleep—Luke tells us that they were "heavy with sleep." Be that as it may, we know that when their eyes were turned toward Jesus, "He was transfigured before them. And His raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so white as no fuller on earth can white them."

"And there appeared unto them Elias and Moses, and they were talking with Jesus."[3]

Death but a Change.

These heavenly personages talked, not to Jesus but with him, about His approaching death, and resurrection, one of the vital things in Christ's ministry which Peter could not comprehend. Surely after this glorious vision of two heavenly beings. Death would lose much if not all its terror for Peter, James, and John. They would know that even if wicked men did kill their Master, that He would still live and still be their Lord and Savior. Death, to them, after this, would be just a "departure." They would realize that "Death hath nothing terrible in it, but what life hath made so."

"It is Good to be Here."

Peter by inspiration had received assurances that Jesus was indeed the Christ; now he witnessed a visible sign of his testimony. Desiring to have a monument to this outward sign, something which other eyes beside his might behold, he cried, out of the impulsiveness of his heart, "Master, it is good for us to be here, and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias." But suddenly, as Moses and Elias "departed," a cloud overshadowed them and a voice came out of the cloud saying, "This is My beloved Son hear Him!"

Sources of Testimony.

Peter's testimony was, by this time, made strong and his faith proved:[4]

(1) By the confirmation of miracles; (2) By seeing heavenly beings; (3) By inspiration; (4) By hearing not only the testimony of these angels but the Divine testimony of God Himself!

Surely his faith is now built upon the Rock, and the gates of hell cannot prevail against it!

This is true; and henceforth, we may safely conclude as we follow his career, that not a shadow of doubt of the divinity of Christ's mission ever crosses Peter's mind.

When we think of Peter having been in almost daily contact with the Savior of men, we may conclude that his testimony grew very slowly, but if so, like the oak tree that grows slowly to, it was all the more enduring.

Purity and Sincerity Essentials.

After all, Peter's experience is the experience that will come to nearly all the boys and girls who read these pages. The knowledge of truth, and the testimony of the Gospel may come gradually to most of them. The one great lesson for them to learn even in youth is, that purity of thought, and a sincere heart seeking the Savior's guidance daily will lead to a testimony of the truth of Christ's Gospel as sure and permanent as that which Peter possessed as he descended Mt. Hermon after seeing the transfiguration of Christ, and hearing the voice of God testify to His divinity.

But knowing that Jesus is the Savior of mankind, did not give Peter a comprehension of the Gospel plan. In this regard, he had yet much to learn. And, it may be, that his strength of character, or shall we say, his judgment, was not yet so sound as it should have been in a man whose whole life should be as firm as a rock.

In the strength of his testimony, and in a somewhat resigned attitude to the fate that sooner or later was to befall his Master, Peter continued to ask many questions, pertaining to the vital aspects of Christ's mission. One of these which the apostles asked themselves as they came down towards the crowd at the foot of the hill, was, What did the Master mean when He said the Son of Man would rise from the dead?

While the Savior was answering this question, and explaining prophecies relating to it, they came to the place where, the evening before, they had left the other disciples. A great multitude had gathered about them, and the scribes were questioning them.

The Afflicted Boy.

In the midst of this crowd was a little boy sorely afflicted by an evil spirit. When he was "possessed," he fell to the ground, foamed at the mouth, gnashed his teeth, and pined away. The father met Jesus, and begged Him to relieve his poor boy, and added that the disciples had tried but could not.

"How long a time is it," asked Jesus, "since this came unto him?" "When a child," the father said; "and ofttimes it hath cast him into fire and into the waters, to destroy him, but if thou canst, I ask thee to have compassion on us, and help us."

Jesus rebuked the foul spirit, and the little boy was healed.

A Contrast.

To Peter, James, and John what a contrast was this scene to the one they beheld the night before on the Mount! Here was manifest the power of the evil one, causing suspicions, pain, agony, death; there was manifest the power of the Holy One, proclaiming happiness, peace, glory, and immortality! Such have been the results of these two powers as they have influenced the lives of men in all ages. Such is the result today. A vital question for us is, Shall we hover around the foothills of sin where the evil one is triumphant, or shall we at least show a willingness to climb the mount of Holiness and let God transform our lives?

  "'Tis not for man to trifle; life is brief,
  And sin is here.
  Our age is but the falling leaf,
  A dropping tear.
  We have no time to sport away the hours,
  All must be earnest in a world like ours."

Footnotes:
1. Weed.

2. Matt. 16:24-26.

3. Matt. 17:1-8; Mark 9:1-6.

4. Peter 1:7.


LESSON 8
Lessons in True Leadership.

"Character is built out of circumstances. From exactly the same materials one man builds palaces, while another builds hovels."

Between the Transfiguration and the last eventful week of the Savior's life on earth, there are only a few recorded instances in scripture with which Peter is personally mentioned. It is significant, however, that nearly everyone of these, bears either directly or indirectly upon the moulding of Peter's character as an Apostolic leader. Peter knows that Jesus is the Christ that should come, but has he strength to defend Him in word and deed? Does he comprehend the divine principles of the Gospel sufficiently to manifest them in his daily life and conversation and in all his associations with his fellowmen? With the probable exception of the tribute money incident, which emphasized for Peter the divine Sonship of his Master, all the lessons following bear directly upon strength of character and principles of conduct.

TRIBUTE
An Ancient Law.

In those days, there was a tax levied upon every male Jew of twenty years old and upwards for the maintenance of the Temple and its services. This law had been in force ever since the days of the children of Israel when the great lawgiver, Moses, said a "half shekel shall be the offering of the Lord."[1]

Matthew tells us that "When they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute money, came to Peter and said, "Doth not your Master pay tribute?"[2] "Yes," promptly answered Peter.

If he knew when he was talking to the tax-gatherers, that "there was no money in the bag," he must have wondered how the half-shekel due as tribute could have been paid that day.

Children of the Kingdom Free.

When Peter went back into the house, Jesus anticipated what he was going to say, and asked Him, "Of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?

"Of strangers," answered Peter.

"Then are the children free," said Jesus, meaning that since this tribute money was for the maintenance of His Father's house, He, the Son, would not have to pay it; but he added:

"Lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money: that take and give unto them for me and thee."

This experience must have impressed Peter with the fact that it is better to suffer offense than to give offense.

A LESSON IN FORGIVENESS
About this same time, Peter asked the question:

"Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Till seven times?"[3]

Perhaps Peter had already been required to settle some difficulty between angry men, or it may be that he had been provoked during a dispute that arose among the disciples as to who was the greatest among them. If some one had taunted him several times about his being the greatest, it is quite probable that his patience was exhausted. At any rate, he wanted to know if there is a limit to the number of times a man should forgive his brother. What a lesson Jesus taught this impetuous apostle when he answered,

"I say not unto thee, until seven times; but until seventy times seven."[4]

Then, to make the teaching more impressive, the Lord told them the parable of the unmerciful debtor.

A certain king took account of his servants for those who had collected his revenue, and found that one owed him ten thousand talents or about fifteen million dollars. This debt the servant could not pay, so the king commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had.[5]

The servant begged for mercy saying, "Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all."

"Then the Lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt." The master not only had pity for the unfortunate debtor, but freed him from prison, let him keep his wife and children, and cancelled the debt.

The Ungrateful Servant.

But that same servant went out and found one of his fellow-servants who owed him a hundred pence, more than ten hundred thousand times less than the first servant had owed his master.

Seizing the fellow-servant by the throat and choking him, he demanded, "Pay me that thou owest."

The fellow-servant fell down at his feet and begged for mercy, "Have patience with me and I will pay thee all."

But the unforgiving, merciless servant refusing to give pity, "went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt."

So when the Lord heard how the servant whom he had forgiven had treated his fellow-servant, he called that servant back, and said:

"O thou wicked servant! I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me; should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow-servant, even as I had pity on thee?"

This unforgiving servant was then told to pay the ten thousand talents, and was delivered over to the "tormentors" until it was all paid.

Then concluded the Savior: "So likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses."

Do you think Peter would ever forget that lesson?

THE REWARD OF SACRIFICE
The Rich Young Ruler

One day Peter and others listened to a conversation between their Lord and a rich young ruler. He was a young man, rich, and, as painted by the old masters, very handsome. But with all, he had kept himself morally clean, and desired to get eternal life.[6] But his heart was set upon his riches; so when the Savior said, "Sell all thou hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come, follow me," the young ruler went away very sorrowful.

Then Peter said, "Lo, we have left all and followed thee." As much as to say, Lord we have left everything for Thee, now what shall be our reward? Jesus said:

"There is no man who has left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of God's sake, who shall not receive manifold more in this present time; and in the world to come, life everlasting."

"But," He added, "there are many who make themselves first, that shall be last; and the last first."

Humility.

This last statement must have contained for Peter, the first among the Twelve, an important lesson in Humility.

A LESSON IN FAITH
It was probably on Tuesday of the last week that Jesus spent with His apostles, that Peter called attention to the result of a divine curse.

The Barren Fig Tree.

A day or so before this, Jesus had gone out of His way to get some figs from a tree that stood some distance off. When he found that the tree bore no fruit He said it should never bear fruit again.

On this Tuesday morning as the disciples were passing by, "they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots."

"And Peter calling to remembrance said unto Him, Master, behold the fig tree which Thou cursedst is withered away."

Power of Faith.

Jesus answered: "Have faith in God. For verily I say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith."[7]

On that same day, Peter was undoubtedly with the Twelve on the Mount of Olives when they asked Jesus "privately" about the destruction of the Temple.[8]

Keep Commandments.

To Peter and to all He said: "Watch ye therefore, and pray always, and keep my commandments, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things which shall come to pass and to stand before the Son of Man when He shall come clothed in the glory of His Father."

Footnotes:
1. Ex. 30:13.

2. Matt. 17:24-27.

3. Matt. 18:21.

4. Matt. 18:22

5. See II Kings 4:1; Lev. 25:39.

6. Read Luke 18:18-30.

7. Mark 11:22-28.

8. Mark 13; Matt. 24; Luke 21.


LESSON 9
ON THE NIGHT OF THE BETRAYAL

"The weakest spot in every man, is where he thinks himself the wisest."

IN THE UPPER ROOM
On Thursday of the Passion Week, Jesus called Peter and John to Him, and said: "Go, and prepare us the passover, that we may eat."[1]

The Passover.

The Passover, you remember, is the name given to the feast established to commemorate the time when the destroying angel passed over the houses of the Hebrews, which had been marked by the blood of the lamb. At this festsival, a lamb was killed, and called the Paschal Lamb. It was on the day that "the passover must be killed" that Peter and John were requested to make preparation.

"Where wilt thou that we prepare?" they asked.

An Upper Room Prepared.

"When ye have entered into the city," replied Jesus, "there shall a man meet you bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the house where he entereth in. Ask him, Where is the guest chamber, where I shall eat the Passover with my disciples? And he shall show you a large upper room furnished; there make ready."[2]

The two apostles did as they were directed, found everything just as the Lord had stated, and made the necessary preparations.

At the appointed hour Jesus and the Twelve gathered in this upper room. Some think it was in Mark's house, some the house of Joseph of Arimathea, but we do not know, nor does it much matter. We are interested most in what took place there.

A Solemn Meeting.

Jesus sat at the head of the feast. On one side, close enough to recline on His Master's breast sat John, and on the other side sat Peter. It was, perhaps, the most solemn meeting at which the Twelve had ever gathered; for the Savior said at the beginning:

"With desire," that is with longing earnestness, "I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer: For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled which is written in the prophets concerning me."

Meaning that His hour had come when His enemies should take Him and put Him to death.

Near the end of the supper, Jesus rose from where He was reclining, laid aside His outer garments, took a towel and tied it around His waist, thus assuming a servant's dress. He then took a basin of water and proceeded to wash the disciples' feet.

Jesus Washeth Disciples' Feet.

It may be that the Savior had detected in the minds of some the same thought which had caused a dispute among them once before, as to who was the greatest among them. Perhaps this thought arose when they saw Peter and John occupying the places of honor. At any rate, their Lord, the greatest among them, assumed the attitude of servant, the least and humblest of them all.

Peter Objects.

When He came to Peter, the latter said: "Lord, dost Thou wash my feet?" Peter would serve his Master, but his Master must never serve him!

"What I do thou knowest not now: but thou shalt know hereafter," answered Jesus.

"Thou needst not to wash my feet."

"If I wash thee not," continued Jesus, "thou hast no part with me."

When Peter thought that his refusal to submit to be served by the Lord, was really putting the Savior away from him, he said,

"Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head."

An Example.

"So after He had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again. He said unto them: Know ye what I have done to you? Ye call me Master and Lord; and ye say well, for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you."

Thus did these twelve men receive in an impressive and practical manner, the divine lesson of service. Thus did they learn that those who were greatest among them were really the servants of all. Indeed, in the Church of Christ, there are no masters and no servants, but all working for every one and each one for all.

"One of You Shall Betray Me."

Immediately following this impressive and sacred ceremony, the full significance of which very few understand, the Savior said, "One of you shall betray me."

This announcement cast a gloom over all. To make it caused "trouble" to come over Christ's "spirit;" and to hear it, made all "exceeding sorrowful."[3]

They began to inquire among themselves which one of them should be so faithless; and soon each asked the Master, "Lord, is it I?"

Judas, last of all answered and said, "Lord, is it I?"

Jesus' answer, "Thou hast said," must not have been heard by the others, because Peter beckoned to John to ask the Master "who it should be of whom he spoke."

Jesus replied, also in a quiet manner, "He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it."

Judas Iscariot.

When he had dipped the sop, he handed it to Judas Iscariot. Peter and John, then, knew who the traitor was; but the others probably did not; for they wondered what Jesus meant when He said to Judas: "That thou doest do quickly."

LOYALTY AS PETER FELT IT
After the traitor went out into the night—oh such a night for him! Jesus continued to teach and to comfort the Eleven.

Love One Another.

"A new commandment I give unto you," He said, "That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another."

Among other things, He said, referring to His approaching death, "Whither I go ye cannot come."

This stirred Peter's love and he inquired, "Lord, why cannot I follow Thee now? I will lay down my life for Thy sake."[4]

Peter to Be Tried.

"Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired you that he may sift you as wheat. But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not; and when thou art converted, [that is, "brought back afresh as a penitent disciple"] strengthen thy brethren."[5]

This grieved Peter very deeply. To think that his Master would even suspect that he, Peter, would even weaken in his steadfastness to his Lord! (It is significant that the Lord called him by his old name, Simon).

Peter protested, saying, "Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into prison, and to death."[6]

A Prophecy.

"I tell you, Peter," continued the Savior, "that the cock shall not crow this day, before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me."

But, he spake the more vehemently. "Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise so said they all."[7]

Peter meant every word he said, and he felt deeply the truth of what he spake; but his real strength had not come to him yet, and his Master knew it. It would come but it would be "Born in the deep silence of a long-suffering heart."

LOYALTY AS PETER ACTED IT
Gethsemane.

Later in the night, the company left the upper room, crossed the brook Kedron, and went to the Garden of Gethsemane, on the west side of the Mount of Olives.

Bidding eight of the Eleven to remain together. He took the other three, Peter, James, and John, apart. His soul "was exceeding sorrowful even unto death."

He said, "Tarry ye here, and watch with me."

"Not My Will but Thine be Done."

Soon He withdrew a little from them, and prayed. The Apostles could see Him, perhaps could hear Him, as He cried, "Father, if it be possible let this cup pass; nevertheless not my will, but thine be done."

When he returned, and found the three sleeping, He said, "Simon [Simon again] sleepest thou? Couldst not thou watch one hour?"

"Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation."

"The spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak."[8]

Peter and His Brethren Drowsy.

A second time He withdrew; a second time returned; a second time found them sleeping; "for their eyes were heavy; neither knew they what to answer Him."

When He returned the third time, He said kindly, "Sleep on now and take your rest; it is enough, the hour is come; behold the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners."

After a little longer sleep, the three were awakened by Jesus, only to see approaching "a great multitude, with swords and staves, from the chief priests, and the scribes and the elders." At their head was Judas who approached his Lord, and betrayed Him with a kiss.

Peter Defends His Lord.

As soldiers went to lay hands upon Jesus, Peter, who was now thoroughly aroused, jumped to the rescue of his Master, "drew his sword, and smote a servant of the high priest and cut off his ear."

This servant, whose right ear Peter struck off with one blow, was called Malchus.

A Lesson.

"Put up thy sword into the sheath," commanded the Savior, "the cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?" What a lesson to Peter! Even though duty led to suffering and death, yet would the Lord not waver in His strength.

Then said Jesus, "Suffer ye thus far, and He touched his ear and healed him."[9]

As the officers led Jesus away, the disciples "all forsook Him, and fled."

Peter Follows Jesus.

Peter's strength and loyalty were wavering; but he could not bring himself to flee with the others. Neither could he conclude that it was best to go with Jesus; so he did neither, but "followed Him afar off, even unto the palace of the high priest."

At first, he remained on the outside, but later ventured in where the servants were sitting.

WEAKNESS BRINGS MISERY
While Peter was standing by the stove warming himself, a girl came in, and recognizing him as one who had been with Jesus, said, "Thou, also wast with Jesus of Galilee."

In a Moment of Weakness.

"I know not what thou sayest," said Peter before them all.

He then stepped out on the porch, perhaps to cool his burning conscience or to try to collect himself to know what best to do.

A man seeing him there cried out, "This man was also with Jesus of Nazareth."

"I do not know the man," said Simon; and this time he took an oath.

One of the servants of the high priest, who was related to Malchus approached Peter a little later, and said, "Did I not see thee in the Garden with Him?"[10]

Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, "Man, I know not what thou sayest." At that moment, Peter heard the cock crow.

Sorrow.

Almost immediately, too, the Savior passing near him, "turned and looked upon Peter." Then recalling the words of his Lord, "Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice."[11] Peter went out and wept bitterly.

Footnotes:
1. Luke 22:8.

2. Luke 22:11-12.

3. Matt. 26:22.

4. John 13:34-37.

5. Luke 22:31, 32.

6. Luke 22:33.

7. Matt. 26:35.

8. Mark 14:38.

9. Luke 22:51.

10. John 18:26.

11. Luke 22:61.


LESSON 10
OUT OF GLOOM, INTO LIGHT

"Strength is born in the deep silence of long-suffering hearts, not amidst joy."

Out of Weakness, Strength.

It is said when Peter "went out speechless from the face of all, * * * and filled the silence, weeping bitterly," that his grief was so heavy that he remained alone all day during Friday and Saturday following the Savior's crucifixion. If so, his sorrow for what he had done was made all the more acute as he recalled the many kind words the Savior had spoken to him, and the many, many happy moments he had spent in the Lord's company. Every word and act and look associated with his Master would flash upon his mind with a new meaning. Perhaps for the first time in his life, he now fully realized why the Lord had desired his nature and faith to be as "The Rock." Through the mist of his bitter tears, he saw all the true attributes of manhood as they were personified in Jesus—Reverence, Brotherliness, Patience, Sincerity, Courage. These and many other noble traits made Jesus appear to him now more holy than ever. But the more clearly Peter saw Christ's strength and holiness, the more clearly he realized his own littleness and misery. This last manifestation of his weakness, which led him to deny his Lord, made him see himself in a new light, and it had a decisive effect upon him. Out of the "deep silence" of his suffering, those two days, there was born that strength which Christ had urged upon him ever since He called him "Peter."

A Sad Meeting.

It must have been a sad meeting when John and Peter first came together after the Crucifixion. When it was or where, we are not told; but we are sure that John must have recognized a great change in his fellow-apostle. Out of the haggard look and the deep lines of grief there must have shone a humility which John had never before seen in Peter's face. We can only imagine what Peter's feelings were as he listened to John tell of all that had happened before Herod and Pilate, and at the Cross. Mingling with Peter's grief was the keen disappointment that their Messiah, their King, was not to free the Jews and rule over them as he had hoped. In doubt as to what to do, they probably decided to visit the place where their Master had been laid, and then return to their former vocation as fishermen.

At the Sepulchre.

But there was one whose love and devotion took her to the tomb even before the Apostles. Mary Magdalene, "while it was yet dark" approached the place where she thought Jesus slept in death. But instead of seeing her Lord's body in the cold, dark sepulchre, around which there was nothing but gloom and sorrow, she found an empty tomb. In alarm, she ran to Peter and John, and breathlessly cried, "They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre." "Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the sepulchre." At first, they ran together, but Peter already weary with suffering, was soon out-distanced by the younger Apostle John, who reached the place first.

"And stooping down, and looking in, he saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in."

Just to look in, however, did not satisfy Peter; for as soon as he came, he "went into the sepulchre." John followed him. They noticed the napkin that had been on Jesus' head wrapped and placed by itself; the linen clothes, too, were folded neatly and placed aside with care. They concluded that thieves would not have done this, and so dispelled Mary's theory that the Lord's body had been stolen. But "as yet they knew not the scripture that He must rise again from the dead."

Mary Beholds Risen Redeemer.

Filled with wonder and perplexity, the two disciples "went away again to their own home," but Mary lingered near the tomb, and as a reward for her faithfulness and devotion, became the first person in the world to behold the risen Redeemer.

Peter Sees His Lord.

Other women who came to the tomb that morning to render, as they thought, the last slight service to their Lord, were permitted also to see Him. Later on that same day, it seems that He appeared to Peter; but where, or under what circumstances, or what was said, we do not know. We may rest assured, however, that Peter's repentant soul was filled with joy eternal as he received the divine forgiveness of His Lord.

Disciples From Emmans.

That evening as the Eleven were assembled in a room talking over the events of the day, and particularly the Lord's appearance to Peter, there entered two disciples from Emmaus. They were no sooner in the presence of the Eleven, than they heard the joyous message, "The Lord is risen indeed and hath appeared unto Simon." They could readily believe this, for they said, "When we were returning from Jerusalem, today, after having heard of the angels and the empty tomb, Jesus Himself drew near and went with us."

Jesus Appears to Eleven.

While they were thus assembled, Jesus appeared to them again, "and saith unto them. Peace be unto you." Such scenes as that cannot be described, and the evangelists who tell us about it simply state the fact and leave us to imagine what their thoughts and feelings were on that glorious occasion. We are sure, though, that we can say of Peter as has been written of the Prophet Joseph when he, too, saw the Savior,

  "O what rapture filled his bosom,
  For he saw the living God."

THE FISHERMAN BECOMES THE SHEPHERD
On Sea of Tiberias.

Several days after this, Peter and six other disciples were back on the sea of Tiberias, fishing. They were in Galilee, evidently waiting to meet the Lord there as He had promised. One evening, as if Peter had almost despaired of waiting, he said to the others,

"I'm going a fishing."

"We also go with thee," said they.

They entered into a boat immediately, and let down their nets. They toiled all night, and caught nothing, just as some of them had done on a memorable occasion several months before.

As morning dawned, they saw a man standing on the shore, but in the distance, they could not tell who he was. Suddenly the man cried,

"Sirs, have ye any meat?"

"No," was their reply.

Many Fish Caught.

"Cast the net on the right side of the ship and ye shall find," said the man.

They did so, and caught so many fish that they could scarcely draw in the net.

John, whose loving eyes were made more keen by a loving heart, rushed to Peter's side and whispered, "It is the Lord."

Instantly, Peter knew John spoke the truth, and man of action that he was, he put on his fisherman's coat, plunged into the sea, and hastened to the feet of his Master. The others came in the little ship, dragging the net of fishes.

Jesus had already started a fire, and' was cooking them something to eat. After the greetings, He said, "Bring of the fish which ye have now caught."

Peter was the leader in going to the net and in drawing it to the land. While the fish were cooking, the disciples counted the number caught, and found that in that one draught there were one hundred and fifty-three: "and for all there were so many, yet was the net not broken."

Peter a Shepherd of Christ's Fold.

Jesus had shown them where to catch the fish, He had started the fire on which to cook them, and now "He taketh the bread and giveth them and the fish likewise." Surely these little incidents would tend to impress them with the truth that if they "would seek first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness all else will be added." At any rate, this is the lesson taught on that great occasion: The apostles were not now to spend their lives seeking the things which perish, but in searching for souls that will endure throughout all eternity. Many are now together in the fold of Christ, and the shepherd is called away. Henceforward Peter and his associates must be the keepers of this flock.

When they had broken their fast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?"

"Yea, Lord," answered Peter, "Thou knowest that I love Thee."

"Feed my lambs." That is, Take care of the little ones in my Church. Do not let them go astray in paths that will lead them to sin and misery.

He saith unto him again the second time,

"Simon, son of Jonas lovest thou me?"

"Yea, Lord, Thou knowest that I love Thee."

"Feed my sheep." Keep the older ones together and give them the words of life as thou hast received them from me.

A third time Jesus said,

"Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?"

And Peter, somewhat grieved, answered, "Lord, thou knowest all things; Thou knowest that I love Thee."

"Feed my sheep."

Duty First.

And then the Savior admonished Peter not always to follow his own inclinations, and impulsive nature; but ever to do his duty as the Shepherd of the Fold. When Peter was young, and did not have the knowledge and responsibility he now possessed, he could go fishing, and make money, or study, or do whatever he wished, but now he must attend to his duties in the Kingdom of God no matter what might come to him personally in doing so. Even though Peter's duty led to the cross, the Savior said, "Follow me."

While this conversation was going on, Jesus and Peter were walking alone a little ahead of the others. Peter turned, and saw John following close to them.

"Lord," said Peter, "what is John to do?"

"If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee, follow thou me." As much as to say, Just attend faithfully to your duty, Peter, teach others to do the same, and all will be well.

This is the last recorded word of Christ to Peter; but he was present of course when the Savior gave His final charge to the Twelve.[1]

From this time Peter's zeal in the Work of the Ministry was constant, and his boldness unsubdued.

Footnotes:
1. Mark 16:16


LESSON 11
A TRUE LEADER AND VALIANT DEFENDER

"The reward of one's duty done is the power to do another."

With a knowledge that Jesus Christ was his Savior, that he was happiest when he did what his Lord wanted him to do, and that when he did wrong or yielded to the influence of evil men, he was miserable, Peter, began his great mission as chief apostle and president of the Twelve.

In Jerusalem.

In accordance with the Savior's command "that they should not depart from Jerusalem" until they received the Holy Ghost, for some time after the Lord's ascension, made his home in the Holy City. Here he and James and John, and others of the Eleven, frequently met in an upper room, perhaps the same room in which Jesus had eaten the Passover with His disciples. With them were Mary, the Mother of Jesus, and some other women.

AN APOSTLE CHOSEN
A New Apostle Chosen.

On one of these occasions, there were present one hundred and twenty people, "all engaged in prayer and supplication." Peter arose in their midst and said it was necessary to choose a man who had been faithful in following the Savior to take the place of the traitor, Judas, in the Quorum of Twelve Apostles. There were two names suggested, Joseph called Barsabas, and Matthias. Knowing that the Lord should choose the men who were to be His special witnesses, they prayed, saying, "Thou, Lord, who knowest the hearts of all men, show whither of these two Thou hast chosen." Then they "gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles."

THE DAY OF PENTECOST
The Holy Ghost.

Before nine o'clock in the morning, ten days after the Saviors' ascension, and fifty days after the Passover associated with the crucifixion, the apostles held a memorable meeting. As they sat "with one acord in one place" "suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting." Thus came the baptism by fire and the Holy Ghost as Christ had promised. The Comforter about which their Master had so often spoken had at length come to them, to guide and to inspire them as Jesus had done in person.

The Gift of Tongues.

Immediately a wonderful manifestation took place. Though nearly all the apostles were Galileans and spoke the same language, yet when they began to bear testimony of Christ and His Gospel, they "began to speak with other tongues as the spirit gave them utterance."

That a remarkable thing had occurred was soon noised about the city, and people in great numbers gathered around the apostles. In the crowd were Jews from many nations who had come to Jerusalem to celebrate Pentecost. These spoke the language of the country from which they came. Imagine their amazement when every one heard the Gospel preached in his own tongue!

"Are not theses men who speak Galileans?" they asked. "Yes," was the answer.

"Then how hear we every man in his own tongue, wherein we were born?"

As the apostles, one after another, told of the salvation of man through the Gospel of Jesus Christ, some of the people were amazed, and some amused, but all were perplexed.

"What does this mean?" asked some.

"They act as though they are drunken," said others.

Then Peter arose, and, in mighty power, addressed the multitude. "Ye men of Judea," he began, "and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem; be this known unto you, and hearken to my words:

Peter's Address.

"For these are not drunken as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day.

"But this is what was spoken by the Prophet Joel."[1]

Undoubtedly only a small part of Peter's address is given to us; but as we read his inspired words, and partake of the fearlessness with which he told the Jews that they had crucified the Christ, we readily become convinced that the weakness he manifested about a month and a half before, has been replaced by the strength of the man of God. Then he stammered and swore, "I know not the man;" now, he declared, "This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof, we are all witnesses."

His Fearlessness.

With all the courage of his convictions, and with the power of the Holy Ghost, he added: "Therefore, let all the house of Israel know assuredly, God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ."

As they heard of the wickedness in crucifying the Christ and of many other sins, they desired to get forgiveness for what they had done, and cried out to Peter—and the other apostles,

"Men and brethren, what shall we do?"

"What Shall We Do?"

In Peter's answer, we see the open door through which all must pass who desire to be saved in the Kingdom of God:

"Repent and be baptized, everyone of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of your sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost."

Then those who believed what Peter had said, were baptized; and the little band of one hundred and twenty grew that day to three thousand one hundred and twenty. And every day thereafter, many others became converted, and joined the Church.

THE MAN WHO HAD NEVER WALKED.
The General Meeting Place.

About three o'clock one afternoon Peter and John were going up to the Temple to pray. Here they came every day to meet in one accord with the saints, and then visit "from house to house; breaking bread." Thus the Temple seems to have been the general meeting place for the first followers of the Redeemer. It was His house, and there they liked to gather to worship. The main entrance to the Temple was by way of "Solomon's Porch" through a gate that was called "The beautiful Gate." Here gathered all the poor people—the blind, the lame, the weak, and those who were diseased—who lived by asking alms from those who came to the Temple.

An Appeal.

On this particular afternoon, one of these made his piteous appeal to Peter and John. He was a man forty years old, but he had never taken a step in his life. Friends would carry him there in the morning, and then carry him home at night. In answer to his request for money, Peter said, "Look on us."

The Answer.

While the man was wondering how much money the apostles would give him, Peter added, "Silver and gold have I none: but such as I have, give I thee: in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk."

Taking him by the right hand, Peter lifted him up, and immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength.

The man was so happy that he went into the Temple leaping and praising God for the great miracle that had come into his life.

Again the people were "filled with wonder and amazement," and gathered in great numbers in "Solomon's Porch" staring at Peter and John, wondering what kind of men they were.

Another Powerful Address.

Here Peter gave another great address in which he said that this man was healed through faith in the name of Jesus Christ "whom God hath glorified, whom ye delivered up and denied Him in the presence of Pilate, when he was determined to let Him go.

"But ye denied the Holy One and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you; and killed the Prince of Life, whom God hath raised from the dead; whereof we are witnesses."[2]

Footnotes:
1. Read the entire address as recorded in Acts 2:14-37.

2. Read Acts 3:2-26.


LESSON 12
PETER AND JOHN ARRESTED

"As no good is done, or spoken, or thought by any man without the assistance of God, * * * so there is no evil done, or spoken, or thought without the assistance of the devil."

Peter Interrupted.

While Peter was still preaching to the thousands assembled in "Solomon's Porch," he saw approaching from the castle near the Temple, the captain of the guard and his band.

The Jewish priests had become jealous, and suspicious of the apostles, and looked with alarm at the thousands of people joining the Church. So they decided to call out the soldiers, disperse the multitude, and arrest Peter and John as the men responsible for all the excitement. However, about five thousand of the people were converted that afternoon.

Imprisoned.

So the soldiers "laid hands on them," and put them in jail, "For it was now eventide," and, therefore, too late to take them to trial. Though they were shut up in close cells, yet their spirits were free and their consciences clear. They could sleep more peacefully than the priest who had caused their arrest.

Before the Sanhedrin.

In the morning, the prisoners were taken to the Sanhedrin where sat Annas, the high priest and Caiaphas, and John and Alexander, and relatives of the high priest. These men had condemned Jesus, perhaps in this very room, and they were determined that the preaching in the name of Jesus of Nazareth must cease.

Others were present that morning, and among them true friends to the apostles. One of these was the lame man, who had been healed.

Curiosity and Amazement.

As he was the innocent cause of the multitude's gathering the previous evening, everybody seemed to be even more interested in him than in the prisoners. He was carried, they knew, only twenty-four hours ago, to the temple gate, and now they see him walking firmly through the crowd to get near the apostles.

"By what power, or by what name, have ye done this?" demanded one of the judges.

"Then Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them. Ye rulers of the people, and elders of Israel,

"If we this day be examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole;

Peter Testifies of Christ.

"Be it known unto you all, and unto all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus of Nazareth whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by Him doth this man stand here before you whole."

How those sinful men must have quailed as they beheld Peter's dignity, felt his sincerity, and listened to the flashing words that pierced their guilty souls!

He told them further that they could get no salvation unless they, too, took upon themselves the name of Christ: "for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved."

What could the priests say? What could they do?

Nothing.

Enemies Confounded.

There stood the man sound and whole, who had been helpless for forty years!

There stood Peter boldly proclaiming that the miracle was wrought in the name of Jesus of Nazareth whom they had condemned to death.

They considered Peter unlearned, but he had confounded them all.

Counsel.

After ordering the prisoners to be taken into another room, they said among themselves:

"What shall we do to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them is manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem and we cannot deny it."

So, in order that the doctrine the apostles were preaching would spread no further, they concluded to threaten Peter and John, and command them not to speak to any man in "this name."

So they called the prisoners back and said in effect; "You must never more speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus."

Better to Obey God Than Man.

Said the apostles, "Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.

"For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard."

No doubt these priests would have punished the apostles then, if they had not been afraid of the people, all of whom "Glorified God for that which was done."

When they were let go, Peter and John went "to their own company," and told their friends all that had happened. When they heard it, the saints united in a prayer of thanksgiving to God for all His blessings unto them.[1]

At this meeting there was another mighty manifestation of the Holy Ghost, "and they spake the word of God with boldness."

DANGERS WITHIN THE FOLD
Unconverted.

But these leaders had to contend not only with enemies outside the Church but with the scheming, dishonest people who stole their way into the fold. There were men and women who had not repented of their sins before they were baptized; so they did not receive the Holy Ghost.

Two of these were Ananias and his wife Sapphira.

Everybody who joined the Church had everything in common. Those who had land and other property sold it and brought the money to the apostles. There were no rich and no poor—all had everything that anybody else had, and everyone possessed what belonged to all.

Two Deceivers.

Ananias and Sapphira sold a possession; but they brought only part of the money, and said it was all. Thus they told a falsehood, and showed themselves to be among the worst people in the world; for,

The Lie Detected.

  "Who dares think one thing,
  And another tell,
  My soul detests him,
  As the gates of hell."

Through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, Peter detected the lie, and said to Ananias,

"Why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?"

"Why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart?

A Severe Punishment.

"Thou hast not lied unto me, but unto God."

"And Ananias hearing these words fell down and gave up the ghost."

About three hours later, his wife came in, and told the same story as her husband. She, too, received a divine rebuke, and paid the penalty of her sin by giving up her life.

After that, no one dare try to deceive the apostles in giving gifts to the Church.

This is a good lesson for all to keep in mind today especially when paying tithing to the Lord.

Footnotes:
1. See Acts 4:23-31.


LESSON 13
PERSECUTED BUT UNDISMAYED

"Dinna curse him, sir; I have heard it said that a curse was a stone flung up to the heavens, and most likely to return on the head of him that sent it."

The earnestness with which Peter and the other Apostles preached the Gospel of Jesus Christ had a wonderful effect upon the multitudes who heard them. At Solomon's Porch, day after day, men and women heard the Twelve testify that the Redeemer of the world had indeed come.

Sick Healed.

These testimonies were corroborated, too, by wonderful manifestations; for "by the hands of the Apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the people." So great was the faith in the power of God that "they brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them."

Nor were the sick in Jerusalem the only persons blessed; but people from the villages near Jerusalem who were sick and afflicted with evil spirits appealed to the Apostles, and by the power of God, were healed.

Rejoicing and Unity.

It must have given Peter and his fellow Apostles much cause for rejoicing to see the interest and the faith of so many thousands in the message of Christ. What rejoicing, too, in the hearts of all those invalids, who, made well, leaped from their couches and joined in the praises of the Redeemer!

PETER. They brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them.

PETER.
"They brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them."

How the Twelve must have loved each other and their hearts beat as one as, day after day, they bore witness to the death and the resurrection of their Lord, and received divine assurances that He was still manifesting Himself to them through the Holy Ghost! As this Spirit permeated those who joined the Church, no wonder that "the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul."

Hatred.

But there were some men in Jerusalem who were made very jealous of the Apostles, and whose hearts were filled, not with rejoicing but envy. These were the men who had been the leaders in crucifying Jesus. It is said that "No sooner is a temple built to God, but the devil builds a chapel hard by;" thus while the Lord was pouring out the Spirit of love upon those who joined the Church, the devil was pouring hate into the hearts of those who were wicked and would not repent.

Peter Imprisoned.

So, "the high priest rose up, and all they that were with him, and, being filled with envy, laid their hands on the Apostles, and put them in the common prison." These prejudiced and ignorant rulers were determined to make the Twelve stop preaching Christ; because if what the Twelve said was true, these rulers would be blamed for having put to death the King of the Jews. But poor, puny man cannot hinder the work of the Lord.

A Miraculous Deliverance.

Some time during the night while the prisoners were together in the prison room—perhaps singing hymns and praying—an angel of the Lord appeared to them. He opened the prison doors, brought them out, and said:

"Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life."

About this command George L. Weed writes:

"'Go'—the very word they had heard from the Lord before His ascension to Heaven, whence He had sent His angel to repeat it in prison. 'Go'—in spite of threats and commands, of bolts and bars and prison guards. In the name of Him who commanded you, 'Go, preach my Gospel,' do ye 'Stand and speak in the Temple'—the very place whence ye have been driven, Speak to the people, all who will listen, for your Master and mine is the Savior of them all. Speak all the words of this life—the promised future life of which the resurrection of Jesus is the first fulfilment."

Obedient to the angel's command, the Twelve entered into the temple early in the morning, and taught. How their message must have thrilled the eager listeners who had assembled that early to hear the word of God!

The Jews Perplexed.

Just as early that same morning another group of men assembled. The high priest called his council together, "and all the senate of the children of Israel." When this council was in readiness, the high priest sent to the prison for Peter and his brethren. Soon the officers returned and said:

"The prison truly found we shut with all safety, and the keepers standing without before the doors: but when we had opened, we found no man within."

Perplexed by this unexpected anouncement, the high priest and council seemed to be unable to decide just what to do. While they were still seeking for a satisfactory explanation or for the next definite step to take, some one entered, saying:

"Behold, the men whom ye put in prison are standing in the temple, and teaching the people."

Hearing this, the captain of the temple with his officers fetched the Apostles before the council. But the officers took them "without violence;" that is, without doing them any injury or without using them roughly; "for they feared the people, lest they should have been stoned."

As soon as the Twelve appeared, the high priest demanded:

Before the Council.

"Did not we straitly command you that ye should not teach in this name? and behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this man's blood upon us."

His prejudiced heart prompts him to speak of Jesus without mentioning His name. But even in his bitterness, he bears a noted testimony of the success of the Apostles' preaching. "Ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine," said he, "and now intend to bring this man's blood upon us." Did the high priest remember, just then, that the Jews cried at the trial of Jesus, "His blood be upon us, and upon our children?" If so, he must have felt fearful that the imprecation might be realized.

Then said Peter and the other Apostles:

"We ought to obey God rather than men." Manifesting as much eagerness as the high priest had shown reluctance to name Jesus, Peter added:

A Bold Speech.

"The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree.

"Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. We testify to these things and the Holy Ghost also says they are true."

This bold speech cut the wicked judges to the heart. It made them so angry that they talked of slaying the Twelve, just as they had killed the Savior.

Gamaliel's Defense.

But there was one able lawyer among them who had justice in his heart. His name was Gamaliel. He stood up among them and said:

"Put these men out of the hall for a little space."

When this was done, he continued, in effect:

"Ye men of Israel, be careful what you do to these men. If what they are preaching is of man it will soon pass away, just as Theudas and about four hundred who joined him were scattered and brought to naught; and just as Judas of Galilee and those who believed in him were dispersed.

"But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God."[1]

Beaten and Released.

Gamaliel's influence prevailed; and the Apostles' lives were spared; but they were not released until they had been beaten and commanded not to speak in the name of Jesus. If the beating they received was a scourging, each man was stripped to the waist, his arms tied to a low pillar, that he might lean forward, so the whipping could more easily strike him, and he was given thirty-nine lashes.

As the Twelve, bleeding from the wounds of the lash, left the council chamber, their hearts were filled, not with sorrow and regret, but with rejoicing "that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for His name."

Footnotes:
1. Read the text: Acts 5:33-39.


LESSON 14
A SPECIAL VISIT TO SAMARIA

Deacons.

As the membership of the Church increased, men were called and ordained to various offices in the work of the ministry. Besides the Apostles, there were Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, Deacons, etc. Among the first to be chosen and ordained to a particular office of service in the Church were "seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom." Their names were, Stephen, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolas. They are called Deacons and one of their chief duties was to oversee the distribution of food among the poor.

Stephen Martyred.

Shortly after their appointment, a bitter and cruel persecution arose against the Church at Jerusalem during which the Saints were scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea, and Samaria. Stephen, "a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost," was stoned to death. Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and there continued to preach Christ unto the Samaritans.

Philip.

It seems that great power accompanied Philip's ministry, for "unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed; and many taken with palsies, and that were lame, were healed. And there was great joy in that city." The people, "with one accord," heeded Philip's message and were baptized into the Church.

Authority Limited.

But baptism by water is not sufficient. It must be followed by the baptism of the Holy Ghost. It seems, however, that Philip, though he had authority to baptize, did not have the right to confer the Holy Ghost. He, therefore, probably held the office of Priest.

Holy Ghost Given.

When the news that Samaria had received the Gospel reached Jerusalem, "Peter and John were sent unto them. Who, when they were come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost." On the heads of these baptized believers, Peter and John then laid their hands and conferred upon them the Holy Ghost.

Pretenders.

The Lord does not accept everyone who is baptized into the Church. Only those who sincerely believe in Jesus Christ as the Redeemer of the World and who repent of their sins receive the Holy Ghost. Those who are baptized without faith and repentance are mere pretenders.

One such joined the Church in England a few years ago. One day a member seeing that the young man had no faith, asked him why he had joined the Church.

"Oh, just to get out to America," he replied.

A little later in the conversation, he confessed to having joined the Catholic Church, at one time, to get a string of beads! and afterward joined the Latter-day Saints to come to Utah. Of course, it was not long before he was excommunicated, and soon after fell into the depths of sin and misery.

Simon the Sorcerer.

At the time Philip went to Samaria, there was a man named Simon in the city, who was a great pretender. He claimed to be a sorcerer, and made a great deal of money by bewitching people with his sorceries. However, when the people heard the true Gospel, and saw miracles wrought by the power of God, they lost interest in Simon's sorceries, and were baptized by Philip.

ST. PETER AND ST. JOHN IN SAMARIA. On the heads of these baptized believers, Peter and John then laid their hands, and conferred upon them the Holy Ghost.

ST. PETER AND ST. JOHN IN SAMARIA.
"On the heads of these baptized believers, Peter and John then laid their hands, and conferred upon them the Holy Ghost."

"Then Simon himself believed also; and when he was baptized, he continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the signs and great miracles which were done." But he was not converted. His only purpose of joining the Church was to find out how these miracles were performed, thinking he might use them for gain.

His Greed.

When Simon saw that through the laying on of the Apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, saying, "Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost." Poor, greedy man! His lust for gold led him to sacrifice even his honor!

  "And hence one master passion in the breast,
  Like Aaron's serpent, swallows up the rest."

Simon Rebuked.

If he thought Peter's heart was as avaricious as his own, he soon learned better, for the indignant Apostle, looking straight into the sordid soul of this mercenary hypocrite, answered:

"Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money.

"Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not right in the sight of God."

Outward show and hypocritical pretenses could not influence Peter any more than they could win the favor of God. Only a sincere heart was acceptable. Seeing that Simon's heart was set on making money at the sacrifice of honor, and even the desecration of the word of God, Peter told him to repent of his wickedness, and to pray to God for forgiveness, "for" he added, "I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity."

Such a scathing rebuke, filled the sorcerer with fear, and he pleaded with Peter to pray to God "that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me."

Peter continued for a short time to preach in other cities in Samaria and then returned to Jerusalem.


LESSON 15
AT LYDDA AND JOPPA

Church Established.

Though only a few years had passed since the Apostles had received the final commission to "Go into all the world and preach the Gospel," yet, through their earnest and continuous labors, churches were established in all Judea, Galilee and Samaria. As it was the duty of the Twelve to look after the interests of the whole Church, it became necessary for them to travel throughout all the land of the Jews. Peter visited from place to place, organizing, ordaining, blessing, and preaching the Gospel of Christ.

Eneas the Cripple.

On one of these tours, he visited the cities on the plain of Sharon, which border on the Mediterranean Sea. One of these towns was Lydda, in the southern part of the plain. While visiting the saints here, "he found a certain man named Eneas who had kept his bed eight years, and was sick of the palsy." This was a disease which affected the limbs of those afflicted, and made it impossible for them to walk. This poor cripple had not taken a step for eight years. Undoubtedly, he had heard that Christ had healed men as sorely afflicted as he, and also, that Peter, in the name of Christ, had bade the cripple at the Temple gate to arise and walk. At any rate, when Peter found him he appealed to Peter to give him the same blessing.

"And Peter said unto him, Eneas, Jesus Christ maketh thee whole: arise and make thy bed." This meant for him to fold the rug on which he was lying, and put away for the day. "He arose immediately. And all that dwelt at Lydda and Sharon saw him, and turned to the Lord."

Tabitha.

Not far distant from Lydda was another city named Joppa. One reason why we read of Joppa is because it was the home of a very good woman whom everybody loved. Her name in Hebrew was Tabitha, and in Greek was Dorcas. Both these words mean "Gazelle," the name of a very beautiful animal like a deer. Tabitha seems to have been as beautiful as she was good, and her whole time evidently was spent in giving comfort and happiness to others. She benefited the poor by presenting them with coats and garments that she made with her own hands. But one day she was taken sick, and all her many friends became very anxious about her. When her sickness grew worse and she died, all their hearts were filled with gloom. Among these sad mourners were some widows to whom Tabitha had given comfort. They were truly bowed in grief, as, indeed, was the entire Church at Joppa. After the body was tenderly washed, it was carried to an upper room.

But there was no funeral service held; for some of the disciples had heard that Peter was over at Lydda, and "They sent unto him two men, desiring him that he would not delay to come unto them."

Peter granted their request and went at once to Joppa. "When he was come, they brought him into the upper chamber: and all the widows stood by him weeping;" and, undoubtedly between their sobs, praising the virtues of their departed sister.

Following the example of his Master when the little daughter of Jairus was restored to life, Peter asked everybody in the room to leave. He then knelt down, and prayed. Turning toward the body, he said:

"Tabitha, arise."

Tabitha Restored.

As the first manifestation of life, we are told that "she opened her eyes." What her surprise upon seeing the Chief Apostle by her side instead of her nearer friends—what exchange of greetings were made—what expressions of gratitude, we cannot tell; but "he gave her his hand, and lifted her up, and when he had called the saints and widows, presented her alive."

As a result of this miracle, which became known throughout all Joppa, "many believed in the Lord."

Preached Only to Jews.

Up to this time the Apostles preached only to the Jews because being Jews themselves, they thought the Messiah was their Savior but not the Savior of other nations, especially of those nations who worshiped idols. All peoples nor Jews were called Gentiles and were considered by the Jews to be "common" or "unclean."

Cornelius.

Although the Lord had commanded to "teach all nations," yet the Apostles did not seem to have comprehended their commission, until Peter received a special vision.

While he was staying in Joppa with a man named Simon who was a tanner, there was a Roman officer stationed at Caesarea, thirty miles northward. His name was Cornelius. He was captain of a hundred soldiers, and was therefore called a "Centurion." Although a "Gentile," Cornelius did not worship idols as did most of the Gentiles.

A Devout Man.

Undoubtedly, he had heard of Christ, and knew that many of the Jews accepted Him as their Savior; and he wondered why the true Gospel could not save him as well as the Jews. "He was a devout man, and one that feared God" and taught all in his house to do likewise. Not only this, but he lived a righteous life, which is best of all, and gave also to the poor.

One afternoon, he was praying in his house when an angel appeared to him, and said, "Cornelius."

The suddenness of the angel's appearance filled the Centurion with fear; but he answered,

"What is it, Lord?"

His Prayers Answered.

"Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God," said the angel; "and now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is Peter. He is staying with one Simon the tanner, whose house is by the seaside: he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do."

As soon as the angel had gone, Cornelius called two servants and a soldier who also worshiped the Lord, and telling them what the angel had said, sent them to Joppa. They followed the seashore southward all night, and reached Joppa about noon the next day.

A Midday Vision.

Just about the hour that these messengers entered the city, Peter, as was his custom, went upon the housetop to pray. While there, waiting for the preparation of his noonday meal, he "fell into a trance," in which he saw coming down from heaven a vessel resembling "a great sheet knit at the four corners, and let down to earth, wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air."

While Peter beheld these animals, thinking they were unfit to eat, a voice said: "Rise, Peter; kill and eat."

"Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is common and unclean."

"What God hath cleansed," continued the voice, "that call not thou common."

This was repeated three times, and then the sheet was taken up again to heaven.

Peter Perplexed.

Peter was perplexed, and sat wondering what the vision might mean. However, he was not left long in doubt; for while he was thinking on the vision, "the Spirit said unto him, Behold three men seek thee. Arise, therefore, and get thee down, and go with them, doubting nothing: for I have sent them."

Now it happened that just while Peter was given his vision the three messengers from Cornelius knocked at Simon's door, and were admitted into his house. As Peter entered, and saw them, he said,

"Behold, I am he whom ye seek: what is the cause wherefore ye have come?"

"Cornelius, the centurion, * * * was warned from God by an holy angel," they answered, "to send for thee into his house, and to hear words of thee."

The messengers stayed that night with Peter in Simon's house; and next morning, conducted him and "certain brethren from Joppa," to Caesarea. On the following day, as they came to the Centurion's house, they found Cornelius and all his household, kinsmen, and friends gathered to receive them. As Peter neared the door, Cornelius stepped out to meet him, fell, down at his feet, and began to worship him. But Peter raised him up, saying gently:

"Stand up; I myself also am a man."

As the two men entered the house, Peter, seeing a number of people present, said:

Peter Communes With Gentiles.

"Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to keep company, or come unto one of another nation; but God hath showed me that I should not call any man common or unclean. * * * Now for what intent have ye sent for me?"

Cornelius then told all about his fasting and prayer, the visit of the angel, and the angel's instructions.[1]

The prejudice that had prevented Peter from comprehending the full meaning of the command to "Teach all nations," began to lift from his soul, his eyes began to see more clearly the mercy of our Heavenly Father; and as Cornelius ceased speaking, he exclaimed:

"Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of per sons: but in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him."[2]

Then to this first meeting of Gentiles in the early Church, Peter told the story of the Redeemer, testifying of the Savior's death and resurrection.

Holy Ghost Given.

As final proof to the chief Apostles that the Lord would accept the Gentiles as well as the Jews into His Church, "the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word."

Accepting this as a direct manifestation from God, Peter declared.

"Can any man forbid water, that these may be baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?"

Footnotes:
1. See Acts 10:30-34.

2. See Acts 10:34-43.


LESSON 16
THE THIRD IMPRISONMENT

"They never sought in vain that sought the Lord aright."

"If you cannot pray over a thing, and cannot ask God to bless you in it, don't do that thing. A secret that you would keep from God is a secret that you should keep from your own heart."

After having completed his labors at Lydda, Joppa, and the adjacent towns, Peter returned to Jerusalem and continued his earnest work in the ministry.

A Wicked King.

But there was a wicked king ruling over Judea at that time, named Herod Agrippa, who "stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the Church." He was a grandson of Herod the Great, who, you remember, slaughtered all the little children in Bethlehem in his effort to kill the little baby Jesus. He was also a nephew of Herod Antipas, the wicked king who had John the Baptist beheaded. Herod Agrippa possessed the same wicked passions as his grandfather and his uncle; so, of course, he hated and despised the righteous men who, in preaching the Gospel, were condemning sin and wickedness.

Peter Thrust Into Prison.

The first apostle to suffer from King Agrippa's wickedness was James the brother of John whom he killed "with the sword." When he found that this murderous act pleased the haughty and stiff-necked Jews, he thought he would kill some others of the apostolic band. Accordingly, he arrested Simon Peter; but, fortunately, concluded not to kill him until after Easter, so thrust him in prison until a more favorable time for a public execution.

Strongly Guarded.

As if to make sure that Peter would not escape this time, he "delivered him to four quarternions of soldiers to keep him." "This meant four distinct pickets of four guards each, sixteen in all. Each picket was to keep watch three hours and then be relieved by another during the night watches. Two officers must guard at the outer gate of the prison, and two be in the cell, one on each side of the prisoner, with his arms chained to them." Thus firmly guarded and chained, Peter lay down to sleep "between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and the keepers before the door."[1]

James' cruel death and the report of Peter's imprisonment spread consternation among the saints in Judea. Some, perhaps, were fearful; all were prayerful.

Special Assemblies in Prayer.

It seems that groups of earnest saints met in different places, and pleaded in sincere prayer to God to spare their leader's life. Indeed, "prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him." It is thought by some historians that among those who were thus supplicating the Lord were Paul and Barnabas who were probably in Jerusalem at that time.

At Mary's House.

One of the principal meetings was held at the house of Mary the mother of John Mark, who many years after, wrote the Gospel, according to St. Mark.

ST. PETER IN PRISON. The angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison.

ST. PETER IN PRISON.
"The angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison."

While we leave them in solemn prayer on the night before Peter was to be killed, let us go back to the prison, and see what is happening there.

An Angel Appears to Peter.

While Peter lay sleeping on his pallet of straw, "behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison." Evidently, the guards were asleep, and neither saw nor heard anything for the angel touched Peter on the side, and raised him up saying, "Arise up quickly."

As Peter complied, his chains fell off his hands. Then the angel said to him: "Tie your girdle around your waist, and put on your sandals."

Peter, scarcely knowing what he was doing, did as he was told. Then the angel continued:

"Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me."

Still thinking that he was dreaming, Peter followed the angel.

Peter Delivered From Prison.

They left the guards in the cell, passed the first guard of soldiers, then the second; but no one tried to stop them. When they came to the big "iron gate that leadeth to the city," it "opened to them of its own accord." The angel continued to direct Peter through one of the streets of the city, then left him as suddenly as he had appeared.

By this time, however, Peter fully realized that he was not dreaming, but was actually out of prison. He said to himself:

His Life Saved.

"Now I know of a surety, that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the Jews." By this last remark, he referred to the public execution that Herod had promised to have taken place that very day. But faith and prayers were more mighty in Peter's behalf than the decree of kings, and the demands of the wicked Jews.

Wondering just a little where he should go, he turned to the house of Mary, the mother of John Mark, where, you know, some of the saints were even at that moment praying for his deliverance.

Rhoda.

"As Peter knocked at the door of the gate," a young girl named Rhoda came, and asked who was there. When she heard Peter's voice, she was so glad that she didn't stop to open the gate, but ran immediately into the room saying:

"Peter is here—standing outside the door."

Friends Astonished.

So suddenly interrupted in their prayer, the people would not believe her, but said she was beside herself. But Rhoda insisted that she was right. She knew Peter's voice, and she knew he was at the door. They finally concluded that "it was his angel."

In the meantime, Peter kept knocking until he was finally admitted. It seems that the little group hardly expected their prayers to be answered in just that literal way; so "when they opened the door and saw him, they were astonished."

Peter, holding up his hand, and beckoning them to be quiet, told them how the Lord had delivered him from prison. Then he added: "Go explain all these things to James, and to the brethren." This James was probably the brother of Jesus, who seems to have been appointed to take charge of the Church at Jerusalem.[2]

Peter Gets Away.

Knowing that as soon as he would be missed in prison the soldiers of old Herod would be searching for him, Peter went unto another place.

When morning came, there was a great stir among the soldiers because of Peter's having escaped. Herod ordered a thorough search in vain.

Then, thinking the keepers of the prison had been careless and negligent, this wicked ruler ordered them put to death.

Guards Put to Death.

Not long afterward he, himself, died so suddenly and so miserably, that some said the wrath of God was visited upon him because of his wickedness. Luke tells us that the "angel of the Lord smote him."

Herod's Death.

But Peter, whom Herod had sought to kill, was spared, through the blessings of the Lord, to bless the Church, and to preach the Gospel for many years afterward.

Footnotes:
1. Acts 12:6.

2. Gal. 1:19.


LESSON 17
CLOSING SCENES OF A RIGHTEOUS MINISTRY

"The Gospel is the fulfillment of all hopes, the perfection of all philosophy, the interpreter of all revelations, and a key to all the seeming contradictions of truth in the physical and moral world."

Peter's Character.

Many years have passed since Peter met Jesus, and was told that he should be called "Cephas which is by interpretation, a Stone." Little did Peter realize then, why the Lord desired to have this fisherman's character become as a rock. Little did he realize what mighty responsibility his Master desired to place upon him. But the years that have intervened have been filled with wonderful experiences, all of which tended to make Peter not only the Rock-man Christ had desired him to become, but the great leader and chief apostle in the Church of Christ.

Fearlessness, faithfulness, prayerfulness, humility, and an untiring zeal in his efforts to instruct and to bless the people are traits of Peter's character that shine out in his life.

We should be reminded, however, that this rock character was not formed all at once. It grew gradually. You remember how Jesus, watching its formation, reproved Peter's weaknesses, commended his strength, and encouraged him, time after time, to remain true to the work as a "fisher of men."

A "Fisher of Men."

We have now reached that period in his life when this man who at one time pulled nets full of fishes from the sea of Galilee can look back over his years of ministry and see numberless nets full of men, women, and children drawn from the sea of ignorance and sin and put safely in the Church of Christ.

There was this difference, however, between the results of his fishing for fish and his fishing for men: The fish he dragged from the element of life to physical death; the men he drew from the element of death to eternal life.

For five years after his deliverance from the third imprisonment, Peter continued his visits from city to city, province to province, preaching the Word of the Lord. During many of these travels, he was, undoubtedly, accompanied by his faithful wife.

Opened Door to Gentiles.

It had been Peter's duty and privilege to preach the Gospel first to the Gentiles. Please note that when the Lord desired the Gentiles to hear His word, He instructed the Chief of the Twelve to turn the key that opened the Gospel door to them. This is one of the special duties of the Apostleship.

Christians.

Since that time, many Gentiles had become converted; and in some cities they met and worshiped together with the Jews. This was particularly true in Antioch, an important city of Syria where the followers of Jesus were first called Christians.

But there were certain men from Judea who went to Antioch and caused trouble. These were Jews who had accepted the Gospel, but who still believed that the Gentiles would have to do everything the Jews did before they could obtain salvation.

Peter Justifies the Gentiles.

The question as to whether the Gentiles might receive the Gospel and be saved, without conforming to every Jewish rite, came before the Twelve and other Church leaders in Jerusalem.

"And when there had been much disputing, Peter arose up, and said unto them:

"Men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the work of the Gospel and believe.

"And God, who knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us;

"And put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith."

He then told them not to provoke God by passing some rule that would compel the Gentiles to do what the Lord does not require of them. For, he added, "We believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved, even as they."

Upholds the Right.

There was a time when Simon, the Jewish fisherman, with all his Jewish prejudices, would have rather yielded to the Jewish side of this question; but now, it was not Simon, the fisherman, who spoke, but Peter, the chief apostle of the Lord. What were prejudices to him in the light of the inspiration of truth! All that was necessary for him to know was, whether the thing was right, and prejudice or no prejudice, favor or no favor, he would defend it.

It is true that once after this council, so Paul says.[1] Peter withdrew from the company of some Gentiles because some of the Jews came down from Jerusalem. Paul says he rebuked Peter for his actions on this occasion; but we have no record of what Peter said or did. Knowing Peter as we do, we are safe in concluding that he did not intentionally waver from the right. It seems more probable that Paul misunderstood Peter's motives. At any rate, we may rest assured that what Peter said and did was intended to help those who were influenced by his actions.

Visits All Churches.

From that time, we know very little of Peter's travels. By reading his epistles, we get a little insight into the nature of his labors and travels during the last years of his life. Undoubtedly, he visited every country where there were organized branches of the Church, even to the "seven churches in Asia."

Thirty-five Years' Service.

We do not know just where he died, nor the kind of death he suffered; but it is evident that the end was not far off when he wrote his second epistle to the churches. That was about thirty-five years after he first met the Savior. He was in the ministry then, approximately thirty-five years, perhaps longer.

Referring to the prophecy of the Lord on the shore of Galilee, the aged apostle, writing to the Saints and urging them to be true to the Gospel, said:

"Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed me. Moreover, I will endeavor that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance."

Some of the earliest Christian writers tell us that Peter and Paul were both imprisoned in Rome during the terrible persecutions of the Saints under the wicked King Nero.

A Legend.

There is a story told that before Nero had imprisoned Peter, the Saints, perceiving the danger he was in, pleaded with him to leave Rome.

Very reluctantly, he yielded to their entreaties, and escaped from the city, by night. As he was going away, he met the Lord carrying His cross, and going toward Rome. "Master, whither art thou going?" asked Peter. "To Rome, to be crucified a second time," was the reply.

Thinking that if his Lord could be crucified a second time for the Truth, he too, would be willing to die for in, he returned to Rome, and some time later, was condemned by the Emperor Nero to suffer death by crucifixion. As he neared the place of execution, however, Peter asked that he be permitted to hang on the cross with his head downwards, which request was granted.

These circumstances are more or less legendary, and may or may not be true; but this we know that whatever the manner or time of his death Simon Peter died true to every trust that his Lord and Master had given him

  "He has done the work of a true man,—
  Crown him, honor him, love him.
  Weep over him, tears of woman,
  Stoop manliest brows above him!
  No duty could overtake him,
  No need his will outrun;
  Or ever our lips could ask him.
  His hands the work had done."

Footnotes:
1. Gal. 2:7.
Footnotes:
1. Mark 16:16


LESSON 11
A TRUE LEADER AND VALIANT DEFENDER

"The reward of one's duty done is the power to do another."

With a knowledge that Jesus Christ was his Savior, that he was happiest when he did what his Lord wanted him to do, and that when he did wrong or yielded to the influence of evil men, he was miserable, Peter, began his great mission as chief apostle and president of the Twelve.

In Jerusalem.

In accordance with the Savior's command "that they should not depart from Jerusalem" until they received the Holy Ghost, for some time after the Lord's ascension, made his home in the Holy City. Here he and James and John, and others of the Eleven, frequently met in an upper room, perhaps the same room in which Jesus had eaten the Passover with His disciples. With them were Mary, the Mother of Jesus, and some other women.

AN APOSTLE CHOSEN
A New Apostle Chosen.

On one of these occasions, there were present one hundred and twenty people, "all engaged in prayer and supplication." Peter arose in their midst and said it was necessary to choose a man who had been faithful in following the Savior to take the place of the traitor, Judas, in the Quorum of Twelve Apostles. There were two names suggested, Joseph called Barsabas, and Matthias. Knowing that the Lord should choose the men who were to be His special witnesses, they prayed, saying, "Thou, Lord, who knowest the hearts of all men, show whither of these two Thou hast chosen." Then they "gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles."

THE DAY OF PENTECOST
The Holy Ghost.

Before nine o'clock in the morning, ten days after the Saviors' ascension, and fifty days after the Passover associated with the crucifixion, the apostles held a memorable meeting. As they sat "with one acord in one place" "suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting." Thus came the baptism by fire and the Holy Ghost as Christ had promised. The Comforter about which their Master had so often spoken had at length come to them, to guide and to inspire them as Jesus had done in person.

The Gift of Tongues.

Immediately a wonderful manifestation took place. Though nearly all the apostles were Galileans and spoke the same language, yet when they began to bear testimony of Christ and His Gospel, they "began to speak with other tongues as the spirit gave them utterance."

That a remarkable thing had occurred was soon noised about the city, and people in great numbers gathered around the apostles. In the crowd were Jews from many nations who had come to Jerusalem to celebrate Pentecost. These spoke the language of the country from which they came. Imagine their amazement when every one heard the Gospel preached in his own tongue!

"Are not theses men who speak Galileans?" they asked. "Yes," was the answer.

"Then how hear we every man in his own tongue, wherein we were born?"

As the apostles, one after another, told of the salvation of man through the Gospel of Jesus Christ, some of the people were amazed, and some amused, but all were perplexed.

"What does this mean?" asked some.

"They act as though they are drunken," said others.

Then Peter arose, and, in mighty power, addressed the multitude. "Ye men of Judea," he began, "and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem; be this known unto you, and hearken to my words:

Peter's Address.

"For these are not drunken as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day.

"But this is what was spoken by the Prophet Joel."[1]

Undoubtedly only a small part of Peter's address is given to us; but as we read his inspired words, and partake of the fearlessness with which he told the Jews that they had crucified the Christ, we readily become convinced that the weakness he manifested about a month and a half before, has been replaced by the strength of the man of God. Then he stammered and swore, "I know not the man;" now, he declared, "This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof, we are all witnesses."

His Fearlessness.

With all the courage of his convictions, and with the power of the Holy Ghost, he added: "Therefore, let all the house of Israel know assuredly, God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ."

As they heard of the wickedness in crucifying the Christ and of many other sins, they desired to get forgiveness for what they had done, and cried out to Peter—and the other apostles,

"Men and brethren, what shall we do?"

"What Shall We Do?"

In Peter's answer, we see the open door through which all must pass who desire to be saved in the Kingdom of God:

"Repent and be baptized, everyone of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of your sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost."

Then those who believed what Peter had said, were baptized; and the little band of one hundred and twenty grew that day to three thousand one hundred and twenty. And every day thereafter, many others became converted, and joined the Church.

THE MAN WHO HAD NEVER WALKED.
The General Meeting Place.

About three o'clock one afternoon Peter and John were going up to the Temple to pray. Here they came every day to meet in one accord with the saints, and then visit "from house to house; breaking bread." Thus the Temple seems to have been the general meeting place for the first followers of the Redeemer. It was His house, and there they liked to gather to worship. The main entrance to the Temple was by way of "Solomon's Porch" through a gate that was called "The beautiful Gate." Here gathered all the poor people—the blind, the lame, the weak, and those who were diseased—who lived by asking alms from those who came to the Temple.

An Appeal.

On this particular afternoon, one of these made his piteous appeal to Peter and John. He was a man forty years old, but he had never taken a step in his life. Friends would carry him there in the morning, and then carry him home at night. In answer to his request for money, Peter said, "Look on us."

The Answer.

While the man was wondering how much money the apostles would give him, Peter added, "Silver and gold have I none: but such as I have, give I thee: in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk."

Taking him by the right hand, Peter lifted him up, and immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength.

The man was so happy that he went into the Temple leaping and praising God for the great miracle that had come into his life.

Again the people were "filled with wonder and amazement," and gathered in great numbers in "Solomon's Porch" staring at Peter and John, wondering what kind of men they were.

Another Powerful Address.

Here Peter gave another great address in which he said that this man was healed through faith in the name of Jesus Christ "whom God hath glorified, whom ye delivered up and denied Him in the presence of Pilate, when he was determined to let Him go.

"But ye denied the Holy One and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you; and killed the Prince of Life, whom God hath raised from the dead; whereof we are witnesses."[2]

Footnotes:
1. Read the entire address as recorded in Acts 2:14-37.

2. Read Acts 3:2-26.


LESSON 12
PETER AND JOHN ARRESTED

"As no good is done, or spoken, or thought by any man without the assistance of God, * * * so there is no evil done, or spoken, or thought without the assistance of the devil."

Peter Interrupted.

While Peter was still preaching to the thousands assembled in "Solomon's Porch," he saw approaching from the castle near the Temple, the captain of the guard and his band.

The Jewish priests had become jealous, and suspicious of the apostles, and looked with alarm at the thousands of people joining the Church. So they decided to call out the soldiers, disperse the multitude, and arrest Peter and John as the men responsible for all the excitement. However, about five thousand of the people were converted that afternoon.

Imprisoned.

So the soldiers "laid hands on them," and put them in jail, "For it was now eventide," and, therefore, too late to take them to trial. Though they were shut up in close cells, yet their spirits were free and their consciences clear. They could sleep more peacefully than the priest who had caused their arrest.

Before the Sanhedrin.

In the morning, the prisoners were taken to the Sanhedrin where sat Annas, the high priest and Caiaphas, and John and Alexander, and relatives of the high priest. These men had condemned Jesus, perhaps in this very room, and they were determined that the preaching in the name of Jesus of Nazareth must cease.

Others were present that morning, and among them true friends to the apostles. One of these was the lame man, who had been healed.

Curiosity and Amazement.

As he was the innocent cause of the multitude's gathering the previous evening, everybody seemed to be even more interested in him than in the prisoners. He was carried, they knew, only twenty-four hours ago, to the temple gate, and now they see him walking firmly through the crowd to get near the apostles.

"By what power, or by what name, have ye done this?" demanded one of the judges.

"Then Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them. Ye rulers of the people, and elders of Israel,

"If we this day be examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole;

Peter Testifies of Christ.

"Be it known unto you all, and unto all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus of Nazareth whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by Him doth this man stand here before you whole."

How those sinful men must have quailed as they beheld Peter's dignity, felt his sincerity, and listened to the flashing words that pierced their guilty souls!

He told them further that they could get no salvation unless they, too, took upon themselves the name of Christ: "for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved."

What could the priests say? What could they do?

Nothing.

Enemies Confounded.

There stood the man sound and whole, who had been helpless for forty years!

There stood Peter boldly proclaiming that the miracle was wrought in the name of Jesus of Nazareth whom they had condemned to death.

They considered Peter unlearned, but he had confounded them all.

Counsel.

After ordering the prisoners to be taken into another room, they said among themselves:

"What shall we do to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them is manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem and we cannot deny it."

So, in order that the doctrine the apostles were preaching would spread no further, they concluded to threaten Peter and John, and command them not to speak to any man in "this name."

So they called the prisoners back and said in effect; "You must never more speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus."

Better to Obey God Than Man.

Said the apostles, "Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.

"For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard."

No doubt these priests would have punished the apostles then, if they had not been afraid of the people, all of whom "Glorified God for that which was done."

When they were let go, Peter and John went "to their own company," and told their friends all that had happened. When they heard it, the saints united in a prayer of thanksgiving to God for all His blessings unto them.[1]

At this meeting there was another mighty manifestation of the Holy Ghost, "and they spake the word of God with boldness."

DANGERS WITHIN THE FOLD
Unconverted.

But these leaders had to contend not only with enemies outside the Church but with the scheming, dishonest people who stole their way into the fold. There were men and women who had not repented of their sins before they were baptized; so they did not receive the Holy Ghost.

Two of these were Ananias and his wife Sapphira.

Everybody who joined the Church had everything in common. Those who had land and other property sold it and brought the money to the apostles. There were no rich and no poor—all had everything that anybody else had, and everyone possessed what belonged to all.

Two Deceivers.

Ananias and Sapphira sold a possession; but they brought only part of the money, and said it was all. Thus they told a falsehood, and showed themselves to be among the worst people in the world; for,

The Lie Detected.

  "Who dares think one thing,
  And another tell,
  My soul detests him,
  As the gates of hell."

Through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, Peter detected the lie, and said to Ananias,

"Why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?"

"Why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart?

A Severe Punishment.

"Thou hast not lied unto me, but unto God."

"And Ananias hearing these words fell down and gave up the ghost."

About three hours later, his wife came in, and told the same story as her husband. She, too, received a divine rebuke, and paid the penalty of her sin by giving up her life.

After that, no one dare try to deceive the apostles in giving gifts to the Church.

This is a good lesson for all to keep in mind today especially when paying tithing to the Lord.

Footnotes:
1. See Acts 4:23-31.


LESSON 13
PERSECUTED BUT UNDISMAYED

"Dinna curse him, sir; I have heard it said that a curse was a stone flung up to the heavens, and most likely to return on the head of him that sent it."

The earnestness with which Peter and the other Apostles preached the Gospel of Jesus Christ had a wonderful effect upon the multitudes who heard them. At Solomon's Porch, day after day, men and women heard the Twelve testify that the Redeemer of the world had indeed come.

Sick Healed.

These testimonies were corroborated, too, by wonderful manifestations; for "by the hands of the Apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the people." So great was the faith in the power of God that "they brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them."

Nor were the sick in Jerusalem the only persons blessed; but people from the villages near Jerusalem who were sick and afflicted with evil spirits appealed to the Apostles, and by the power of God, were healed.

Rejoicing and Unity.

It must have given Peter and his fellow Apostles much cause for rejoicing to see the interest and the faith of so many thousands in the message of Christ. What rejoicing, too, in the hearts of all those invalids, who, made well, leaped from their couches and joined in the praises of the Redeemer!

PETER. They brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them.

PETER.
"They brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them."

How the Twelve must have loved each other and their hearts beat as one as, day after day, they bore witness to the death and the resurrection of their Lord, and received divine assurances that He was still manifesting Himself to them through the Holy Ghost! As this Spirit permeated those who joined the Church, no wonder that "the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul."

Hatred.

But there were some men in Jerusalem who were made very jealous of the Apostles, and whose hearts were filled, not with rejoicing but envy. These were the men who had been the leaders in crucifying Jesus. It is said that "No sooner is a temple built to God, but the devil builds a chapel hard by;" thus while the Lord was pouring out the Spirit of love upon those who joined the Church, the devil was pouring hate into the hearts of those who were wicked and would not repent.

Peter Imprisoned.

So, "the high priest rose up, and all they that were with him, and, being filled with envy, laid their hands on the Apostles, and put them in the common prison." These prejudiced and ignorant rulers were determined to make the Twelve stop preaching Christ; because if what the Twelve said was true, these rulers would be blamed for having put to death the King of the Jews. But poor, puny man cannot hinder the work of the Lord.

A Miraculous Deliverance.

Some time during the night while the prisoners were together in the prison room—perhaps singing hymns and praying—an angel of the Lord appeared to them. He opened the prison doors, brought them out, and said:

"Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life."

About this command George L. Weed writes:

"'Go'—the very word they had heard from the Lord before His ascension to Heaven, whence He had sent His angel to repeat it in prison. 'Go'—in spite of threats and commands, of bolts and bars and prison guards. In the name of Him who commanded you, 'Go, preach my Gospel,' do ye 'Stand and speak in the Temple'—the very place whence ye have been driven, Speak to the people, all who will listen, for your Master and mine is the Savior of them all. Speak all the words of this life—the promised future life of which the resurrection of Jesus is the first fulfilment."

Obedient to the angel's command, the Twelve entered into the temple early in the morning, and taught. How their message must have thrilled the eager listeners who had assembled that early to hear the word of God!

The Jews Perplexed.

Just as early that same morning another group of men assembled. The high priest called his council together, "and all the senate of the children of Israel." When this council was in readiness, the high priest sent to the prison for Peter and his brethren. Soon the officers returned and said:

"The prison truly found we shut with all safety, and the keepers standing without before the doors: but when we had opened, we found no man within."

Perplexed by this unexpected anouncement, the high priest and council seemed to be unable to decide just what to do. While they were still seeking for a satisfactory explanation or for the next definite step to take, some one entered, saying:

"Behold, the men whom ye put in prison are standing in the temple, and teaching the people."

Hearing this, the captain of the temple with his officers fetched the Apostles before the council. But the officers took them "without violence;" that is, without doing them any injury or without using them roughly; "for they feared the people, lest they should have been stoned."

As soon as the Twelve appeared, the high priest demanded:

Before the Council.

"Did not we straitly command you that ye should not teach in this name? and behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this man's blood upon us."

His prejudiced heart prompts him to speak of Jesus without mentioning His name. But even in his bitterness, he bears a noted testimony of the success of the Apostles' preaching. "Ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine," said he, "and now intend to bring this man's blood upon us." Did the high priest remember, just then, that the Jews cried at the trial of Jesus, "His blood be upon us, and upon our children?" If so, he must have felt fearful that the imprecation might be realized.

Then said Peter and the other Apostles:

"We ought to obey God rather than men." Manifesting as much eagerness as the high priest had shown reluctance to name Jesus, Peter added:

A Bold Speech.

"The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree.

"Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. We testify to these things and the Holy Ghost also says they are true."

This bold speech cut the wicked judges to the heart. It made them so angry that they talked of slaying the Twelve, just as they had killed the Savior.

Gamaliel's Defense.

But there was one able lawyer among them who had justice in his heart. His name was Gamaliel. He stood up among them and said:

"Put these men out of the hall for a little space."

When this was done, he continued, in effect:

"Ye men of Israel, be careful what you do to these men. If what they are preaching is of man it will soon pass away, just as Theudas and about four hundred who joined him were scattered and brought to naught; and just as Judas of Galilee and those who believed in him were dispersed.

"But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God."[1]

Beaten and Released.

Gamaliel's influence prevailed; and the Apostles' lives were spared; but they were not released until they had been beaten and commanded not to speak in the name of Jesus. If the beating they received was a scourging, each man was stripped to the waist, his arms tied to a low pillar, that he might lean forward, so the whipping could more easily strike him, and he was given thirty-nine lashes.

As the Twelve, bleeding from the wounds of the lash, left the council chamber, their hearts were filled, not with sorrow and regret, but with rejoicing "that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for His name."

Footnotes:
1. Read the text: Acts 5:33-39.


LESSON 14
A SPECIAL VISIT TO SAMARIA

Deacons.

As the membership of the Church increased, men were called and ordained to various offices in the work of the ministry. Besides the Apostles, there were Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, Deacons, etc. Among the first to be chosen and ordained to a particular office of service in the Church were "seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom." Their names were, Stephen, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolas. They are called Deacons and one of their chief duties was to oversee the distribution of food among the poor.

Stephen Martyred.

Shortly after their appointment, a bitter and cruel persecution arose against the Church at Jerusalem during which the Saints were scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea, and Samaria. Stephen, "a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost," was stoned to death. Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and there continued to preach Christ unto the Samaritans.

Philip.

It seems that great power accompanied Philip's ministry, for "unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed; and many taken with palsies, and that were lame, were healed. And there was great joy in that city." The people, "with one accord," heeded Philip's message and were baptized into the Church.

Authority Limited.

But baptism by water is not sufficient. It must be followed by the baptism of the Holy Ghost. It seems, however, that Philip, though he had authority to baptize, did not have the right to confer the Holy Ghost. He, therefore, probably held the office of Priest.

Holy Ghost Given.

When the news that Samaria had received the Gospel reached Jerusalem, "Peter and John were sent unto them. Who, when they were come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost." On the heads of these baptized believers, Peter and John then laid their hands and conferred upon them the Holy Ghost.

Pretenders.

The Lord does not accept everyone who is baptized into the Church. Only those who sincerely believe in Jesus Christ as the Redeemer of the World and who repent of their sins receive the Holy Ghost. Those who are baptized without faith and repentance are mere pretenders.

One such joined the Church in England a few years ago. One day a member seeing that the young man had no faith, asked him why he had joined the Church.

"Oh, just to get out to America," he replied.

A little later in the conversation, he confessed to having joined the Catholic Church, at one time, to get a string of beads! and afterward joined the Latter-day Saints to come to Utah. Of course, it was not long before he was excommunicated, and soon after fell into the depths of sin and misery.

Simon the Sorcerer.

At the time Philip went to Samaria, there was a man named Simon in the city, who was a great pretender. He claimed to be a sorcerer, and made a great deal of money by bewitching people with his sorceries. However, when the people heard the true Gospel, and saw miracles wrought by the power of God, they lost interest in Simon's sorceries, and were baptized by Philip.

ST. PETER AND ST. JOHN IN SAMARIA. On the heads of these baptized believers, Peter and John then laid their hands, and conferred upon them the Holy Ghost.

ST. PETER AND ST. JOHN IN SAMARIA.
"On the heads of these baptized believers, Peter and John then laid their hands, and conferred upon them the Holy Ghost."

"Then Simon himself believed also; and when he was baptized, he continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the signs and great miracles which were done." But he was not converted. His only purpose of joining the Church was to find out how these miracles were performed, thinking he might use them for gain.

His Greed.

When Simon saw that through the laying on of the Apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, saying, "Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost." Poor, greedy man! His lust for gold led him to sacrifice even his honor!

  "And hence one master passion in the breast,
  Like Aaron's serpent, swallows up the rest."

Simon Rebuked.

If he thought Peter's heart was as avaricious as his own, he soon learned better, for the indignant Apostle, looking straight into the sordid soul of this mercenary hypocrite, answered:

"Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money.

"Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not right in the sight of God."

Outward show and hypocritical pretenses could not influence Peter any more than they could win the favor of God. Only a sincere heart was acceptable. Seeing that Simon's heart was set on making money at the sacrifice of honor, and even the desecration of the word of God, Peter told him to repent of his wickedness, and to pray to God for forgiveness, "for" he added, "I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity."

Such a scathing rebuke, filled the sorcerer with fear, and he pleaded with Peter to pray to God "that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me."

Peter continued for a short time to preach in other cities in Samaria and then returned to Jerusalem.


LESSON 15
AT LYDDA AND JOPPA

Church Established.

Though only a few years had passed since the Apostles had received the final commission to "Go into all the world and preach the Gospel," yet, through their earnest and continuous labors, churches were established in all Judea, Galilee and Samaria. As it was the duty of the Twelve to look after the interests of the whole Church, it became necessary for them to travel throughout all the land of the Jews. Peter visited from place to place, organizing, ordaining, blessing, and preaching the Gospel of Christ.

Eneas the Cripple.

On one of these tours, he visited the cities on the plain of Sharon, which border on the Mediterranean Sea. One of these towns was Lydda, in the southern part of the plain. While visiting the saints here, "he found a certain man named Eneas who had kept his bed eight years, and was sick of the palsy." This was a disease which affected the limbs of those afflicted, and made it impossible for them to walk. This poor cripple had not taken a step for eight years. Undoubtedly, he had heard that Christ had healed men as sorely afflicted as he, and also, that Peter, in the name of Christ, had bade the cripple at the Temple gate to arise and walk. At any rate, when Peter found him he appealed to Peter to give him the same blessing.

"And Peter said unto him, Eneas, Jesus Christ maketh thee whole: arise and make thy bed." This meant for him to fold the rug on which he was lying, and put away for the day. "He arose immediately. And all that dwelt at Lydda and Sharon saw him, and turned to the Lord."

Tabitha.

Not far distant from Lydda was another city named Joppa. One reason why we read of Joppa is because it was the home of a very good woman whom everybody loved. Her name in Hebrew was Tabitha, and in Greek was Dorcas. Both these words mean "Gazelle," the name of a very beautiful animal like a deer. Tabitha seems to have been as beautiful as she was good, and her whole time evidently was spent in giving comfort and happiness to others. She benefited the poor by presenting them with coats and garments that she made with her own hands. But one day she was taken sick, and all her many friends became very anxious about her. When her sickness grew worse and she died, all their hearts were filled with gloom. Among these sad mourners were some widows to whom Tabitha had given comfort. They were truly bowed in grief, as, indeed, was the entire Church at Joppa. After the body was tenderly washed, it was carried to an upper room.

But there was no funeral service held; for some of the disciples had heard that Peter was over at Lydda, and "They sent unto him two men, desiring him that he would not delay to come unto them."

Peter granted their request and went at once to Joppa. "When he was come, they brought him into the upper chamber: and all the widows stood by him weeping;" and, undoubtedly between their sobs, praising the virtues of their departed sister.

Following the example of his Master when the little daughter of Jairus was restored to life, Peter asked everybody in the room to leave. He then knelt down, and prayed. Turning toward the body, he said:

"Tabitha, arise."

Tabitha Restored.

As the first manifestation of life, we are told that "she opened her eyes." What her surprise upon seeing the Chief Apostle by her side instead of her nearer friends—what exchange of greetings were made—what expressions of gratitude, we cannot tell; but "he gave her his hand, and lifted her up, and when he had called the saints and widows, presented her alive."

As a result of this miracle, which became known throughout all Joppa, "many believed in the Lord."

Preached Only to Jews.

Up to this time the Apostles preached only to the Jews because being Jews themselves, they thought the Messiah was their Savior but not the Savior of other nations, especially of those nations who worshiped idols. All peoples nor Jews were called Gentiles and were considered by the Jews to be "common" or "unclean."

Cornelius.

Although the Lord had commanded to "teach all nations," yet the Apostles did not seem to have comprehended their commission, until Peter received a special vision.

While he was staying in Joppa with a man named Simon who was a tanner, there was a Roman officer stationed at Caesarea, thirty miles northward. His name was Cornelius. He was captain of a hundred soldiers, and was therefore called a "Centurion." Although a "Gentile," Cornelius did not worship idols as did most of the Gentiles.

A Devout Man.

Undoubtedly, he had heard of Christ, and knew that many of the Jews accepted Him as their Savior; and he wondered why the true Gospel could not save him as well as the Jews. "He was a devout man, and one that feared God" and taught all in his house to do likewise. Not only this, but he lived a righteous life, which is best of all, and gave also to the poor.

One afternoon, he was praying in his house when an angel appeared to him, and said, "Cornelius."

The suddenness of the angel's appearance filled the Centurion with fear; but he answered,

"What is it, Lord?"

His Prayers Answered.

"Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God," said the angel; "and now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is Peter. He is staying with one Simon the tanner, whose house is by the seaside: he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do."

As soon as the angel had gone, Cornelius called two servants and a soldier who also worshiped the Lord, and telling them what the angel had said, sent them to Joppa. They followed the seashore southward all night, and reached Joppa about noon the next day.

A Midday Vision.

Just about the hour that these messengers entered the city, Peter, as was his custom, went upon the housetop to pray. While there, waiting for the preparation of his noonday meal, he "fell into a trance," in which he saw coming down from heaven a vessel resembling "a great sheet knit at the four corners, and let down to earth, wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air."

While Peter beheld these animals, thinking they were unfit to eat, a voice said: "Rise, Peter; kill and eat."

"Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is common and unclean."

"What God hath cleansed," continued the voice, "that call not thou common."

This was repeated three times, and then the sheet was taken up again to heaven.

Peter Perplexed.

Peter was perplexed, and sat wondering what the vision might mean. However, he was not left long in doubt; for while he was thinking on the vision, "the Spirit said unto him, Behold three men seek thee. Arise, therefore, and get thee down, and go with them, doubting nothing: for I have sent them."

Now it happened that just while Peter was given his vision the three messengers from Cornelius knocked at Simon's door, and were admitted into his house. As Peter entered, and saw them, he said,

"Behold, I am he whom ye seek: what is the cause wherefore ye have come?"

"Cornelius, the centurion, * * * was warned from God by an holy angel," they answered, "to send for thee into his house, and to hear words of thee."

The messengers stayed that night with Peter in Simon's house; and next morning, conducted him and "certain brethren from Joppa," to Caesarea. On the following day, as they came to the Centurion's house, they found Cornelius and all his household, kinsmen, and friends gathered to receive them. As Peter neared the door, Cornelius stepped out to meet him, fell, down at his feet, and began to worship him. But Peter raised him up, saying gently:

"Stand up; I myself also am a man."

As the two men entered the house, Peter, seeing a number of people present, said:

Peter Communes With Gentiles.

"Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to keep company, or come unto one of another nation; but God hath showed me that I should not call any man common or unclean. * * * Now for what intent have ye sent for me?"

Cornelius then told all about his fasting and prayer, the visit of the angel, and the angel's instructions.[1]

The prejudice that had prevented Peter from comprehending the full meaning of the command to "Teach all nations," began to lift from his soul, his eyes began to see more clearly the mercy of our Heavenly Father; and as Cornelius ceased speaking, he exclaimed:

"Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of per sons: but in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him."[2]

Then to this first meeting of Gentiles in the early Church, Peter told the story of the Redeemer, testifying of the Savior's death and resurrection.

Holy Ghost Given.

As final proof to the chief Apostles that the Lord would accept the Gentiles as well as the Jews into His Church, "the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word."

Accepting this as a direct manifestation from God, Peter declared.

"Can any man forbid water, that these may be baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?"

Footnotes:
1. See Acts 10:30-34.

2. See Acts 10:34-43.


LESSON 16
THE THIRD IMPRISONMENT

"They never sought in vain that sought the Lord aright."

"If you cannot pray over a thing, and cannot ask God to bless you in it, don't do that thing. A secret that you would keep from God is a secret that you should keep from your own heart."

After having completed his labors at Lydda, Joppa, and the adjacent towns, Peter returned to Jerusalem and continued his earnest work in the ministry.

A Wicked King.

But there was a wicked king ruling over Judea at that time, named Herod Agrippa, who "stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the Church." He was a grandson of Herod the Great, who, you remember, slaughtered all the little children in Bethlehem in his effort to kill the little baby Jesus. He was also a nephew of Herod Antipas, the wicked king who had John the Baptist beheaded. Herod Agrippa possessed the same wicked passions as his grandfather and his uncle; so, of course, he hated and despised the righteous men who, in preaching the Gospel, were condemning sin and wickedness.

Peter Thrust Into Prison.

The first apostle to suffer from King Agrippa's wickedness was James the brother of John whom he killed "with the sword." When he found that this murderous act pleased the haughty and stiff-necked Jews, he thought he would kill some others of the apostolic band. Accordingly, he arrested Simon Peter; but, fortunately, concluded not to kill him until after Easter, so thrust him in prison until a more favorable time for a public execution.

Strongly Guarded.

As if to make sure that Peter would not escape this time, he "delivered him to four quarternions of soldiers to keep him." "This meant four distinct pickets of four guards each, sixteen in all. Each picket was to keep watch three hours and then be relieved by another during the night watches. Two officers must guard at the outer gate of the prison, and two be in the cell, one on each side of the prisoner, with his arms chained to them." Thus firmly guarded and chained, Peter lay down to sleep "between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and the keepers before the door."[1]

James' cruel death and the report of Peter's imprisonment spread consternation among the saints in Judea. Some, perhaps, were fearful; all were prayerful.

Special Assemblies in Prayer.

It seems that groups of earnest saints met in different places, and pleaded in sincere prayer to God to spare their leader's life. Indeed, "prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him." It is thought by some historians that among those who were thus supplicating the Lord were Paul and Barnabas who were probably in Jerusalem at that time.

At Mary's House.

One of the principal meetings was held at the house of Mary the mother of John Mark, who many years after, wrote the Gospel, according to St. Mark.

ST. PETER IN PRISON. The angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison.

ST. PETER IN PRISON.
"The angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison."

While we leave them in solemn prayer on the night before Peter was to be killed, let us go back to the prison, and see what is happening there.

An Angel Appears to Peter.

While Peter lay sleeping on his pallet of straw, "behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison." Evidently, the guards were asleep, and neither saw nor heard anything for the angel touched Peter on the side, and raised him up saying, "Arise up quickly."

As Peter complied, his chains fell off his hands. Then the angel said to him: "Tie your girdle around your waist, and put on your sandals."

Peter, scarcely knowing what he was doing, did as he was told. Then the angel continued:

"Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me."

Still thinking that he was dreaming, Peter followed the angel.

Peter Delivered From Prison.

They left the guards in the cell, passed the first guard of soldiers, then the second; but no one tried to stop them. When they came to the big "iron gate that leadeth to the city," it "opened to them of its own accord." The angel continued to direct Peter through one of the streets of the city, then left him as suddenly as he had appeared.

By this time, however, Peter fully realized that he was not dreaming, but was actually out of prison. He said to himself:

His Life Saved.

"Now I know of a surety, that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the Jews." By this last remark, he referred to the public execution that Herod had promised to have taken place that very day. But faith and prayers were more mighty in Peter's behalf than the decree of kings, and the demands of the wicked Jews.

Wondering just a little where he should go, he turned to the house of Mary, the mother of John Mark, where, you know, some of the saints were even at that moment praying for his deliverance.

Rhoda.

"As Peter knocked at the door of the gate," a young girl named Rhoda came, and asked who was there. When she heard Peter's voice, she was so glad that she didn't stop to open the gate, but ran immediately into the room saying:

"Peter is here—standing outside the door."

Friends Astonished.

So suddenly interrupted in their prayer, the people would not believe her, but said she was beside herself. But Rhoda insisted that she was right. She knew Peter's voice, and she knew he was at the door. They finally concluded that "it was his angel."

In the meantime, Peter kept knocking until he was finally admitted. It seems that the little group hardly expected their prayers to be answered in just that literal way; so "when they opened the door and saw him, they were astonished."

Peter, holding up his hand, and beckoning them to be quiet, told them how the Lord had delivered him from prison. Then he added: "Go explain all these things to James, and to the brethren." This James was probably the brother of Jesus, who seems to have been appointed to take charge of the Church at Jerusalem.[2]

Peter Gets Away.

Knowing that as soon as he would be missed in prison the soldiers of old Herod would be searching for him, Peter went unto another place.

When morning came, there was a great stir among the soldiers because of Peter's having escaped. Herod ordered a thorough search in vain.

Then, thinking the keepers of the prison had been careless and negligent, this wicked ruler ordered them put to death.

Guards Put to Death.

Not long afterward he, himself, died so suddenly and so miserably, that some said the wrath of God was visited upon him because of his wickedness. Luke tells us that the "angel of the Lord smote him."

Herod's Death.

But Peter, whom Herod had sought to kill, was spared, through the blessings of the Lord, to bless the Church, and to preach the Gospel for many years afterward.

Footnotes:
1. Acts 12:6.

2. Gal. 1:19.


LESSON 17
CLOSING SCENES OF A RIGHTEOUS MINISTRY

"The Gospel is the fulfillment of all hopes, the perfection of all philosophy, the interpreter of all revelations, and a key to all the seeming contradictions of truth in the physical and moral world."

Peter's Character.

Many years have passed since Peter met Jesus, and was told that he should be called "Cephas which is by interpretation, a Stone." Little did Peter realize then, why the Lord desired to have this fisherman's character become as a rock. Little did he realize what mighty responsibility his Master desired to place upon him. But the years that have intervened have been filled with wonderful experiences, all of which tended to make Peter not only the Rock-man Christ had desired him to become, but the great leader and chief apostle in the Church of Christ.

Fearlessness, faithfulness, prayerfulness, humility, and an untiring zeal in his efforts to instruct and to bless the people are traits of Peter's character that shine out in his life.

We should be reminded, however, that this rock character was not formed all at once. It grew gradually. You remember how Jesus, watching its formation, reproved Peter's weaknesses, commended his strength, and encouraged him, time after time, to remain true to the work as a "fisher of men."

A "Fisher of Men."

We have now reached that period in his life when this man who at one time pulled nets full of fishes from the sea of Galilee can look back over his years of ministry and see numberless nets full of men, women, and children drawn from the sea of ignorance and sin and put safely in the Church of Christ.

There was this difference, however, between the results of his fishing for fish and his fishing for men: The fish he dragged from the element of life to physical death; the men he drew from the element of death to eternal life.

For five years after his deliverance from the third imprisonment, Peter continued his visits from city to city, province to province, preaching the Word of the Lord. During many of these travels, he was, undoubtedly, accompanied by his faithful wife.

Opened Door to Gentiles.

It had been Peter's duty and privilege to preach the Gospel first to the Gentiles. Please note that when the Lord desired the Gentiles to hear His word, He instructed the Chief of the Twelve to turn the key that opened the Gospel door to them. This is one of the special duties of the Apostleship.

Christians.

Since that time, many Gentiles had become converted; and in some cities they met and worshiped together with the Jews. This was particularly true in Antioch, an important city of Syria where the followers of Jesus were first called Christians.

But there were certain men from Judea who went to Antioch and caused trouble. These were Jews who had accepted the Gospel, but who still believed that the Gentiles would have to do everything the Jews did before they could obtain salvation.

Peter Justifies the Gentiles.

The question as to whether the Gentiles might receive the Gospel and be saved, without conforming to every Jewish rite, came before the Twelve and other Church leaders in Jerusalem.

"And when there had been much disputing, Peter arose up, and said unto them:

"Men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the work of the Gospel and believe.

"And God, who knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us;

"And put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith."

He then told them not to provoke God by passing some rule that would compel the Gentiles to do what the Lord does not require of them. For, he added, "We believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved, even as they."

Upholds the Right.

There was a time when Simon, the Jewish fisherman, with all his Jewish prejudices, would have rather yielded to the Jewish side of this question; but now, it was not Simon, the fisherman, who spoke, but Peter, the chief apostle of the Lord. What were prejudices to him in the light of the inspiration of truth! All that was necessary for him to know was, whether the thing was right, and prejudice or no prejudice, favor or no favor, he would defend it.

It is true that once after this council, so Paul says.[1] Peter withdrew from the company of some Gentiles because some of the Jews came down from Jerusalem. Paul says he rebuked Peter for his actions on this occasion; but we have no record of what Peter said or did. Knowing Peter as we do, we are safe in concluding that he did not intentionally waver from the right. It seems more probable that Paul misunderstood Peter's motives. At any rate, we may rest assured that what Peter said and did was intended to help those who were influenced by his actions.

Visits All Churches.

From that time, we know very little of Peter's travels. By reading his epistles, we get a little insight into the nature of his labors and travels during the last years of his life. Undoubtedly, he visited every country where there were organized branches of the Church, even to the "seven churches in Asia."

Thirty-five Years' Service.

We do not know just where he died, nor the kind of death he suffered; but it is evident that the end was not far off when he wrote his second epistle to the churches. That was about thirty-five years after he first met the Savior. He was in the ministry then, approximately thirty-five years, perhaps longer.

Referring to the prophecy of the Lord on the shore of Galilee, the aged apostle, writing to the Saints and urging them to be true to the Gospel, said:

"Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed me. Moreover, I will endeavor that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance."

Some of the earliest Christian writers tell us that Peter and Paul were both imprisoned in Rome during the terrible persecutions of the Saints under the wicked King Nero.

A Legend.

There is a story told that before Nero had imprisoned Peter, the Saints, perceiving the danger he was in, pleaded with him to leave Rome.

Very reluctantly, he yielded to their entreaties, and escaped from the city, by night. As he was going away, he met the Lord carrying His cross, and going toward Rome. "Master, whither art thou going?" asked Peter. "To Rome, to be crucified a second time," was the reply.

Thinking that if his Lord could be crucified a second time for the Truth, he too, would be willing to die for in, he returned to Rome, and some time later, was condemned by the Emperor Nero to suffer death by crucifixion. As he neared the place of execution, however, Peter asked that he be permitted to hang on the cross with his head downwards, which request was granted.

These circumstances are more or less legendary, and may or may not be true; but this we know that whatever the manner or time of his death Simon Peter died true to every trust that his Lord and Master had given him

  "He has done the work of a true man,—
  Crown him, honor him, love him.
  Weep over him, tears of woman,
  Stoop manliest brows above him!
  No duty could overtake him,
  No need his will outrun;
  Or ever our lips could ask him.
  His hands the work had done."

Footnotes:
1. Gal. 2:7.